




















AutoTrain – Hugging Face






Hugging Face







					Models

					Datasets

					Spaces

					Docs




			Solutions
		

Pricing
			






Log In
				
Sign Up
					













Create powerful AI models without code
A new way to automatically train, evaluate and deploy state-of-the-art Machine Learning models.
				
Create new project
					



				Machine Learning made simple
			
Train custom machine learning models by simply uploading data.

				Automatic training
			
AutoTrain will find the best models for your data automatically.

				Fast deployment
			
Your models are available on the Hugging Face Hub, and ready to serve.
			
Tasks available in AutoTrain:

					LLM Finetuning
				
					Image classfication
				
					Text Classification
				
					Token Classification
				
					Question Answering (extractive)
				
					Translation
				
					Summarization
				
					Text Regression
				
					Tabular Data Classification
				
					Tabular Data Regression
				
Customer stories



AutoTrain is the first AutoML tool we have used that can compete with a dedicated ML Engineer. This allows us to spend our time on research and improving data filters/generation, which is game-changing for a small team like ours. The integration with the Hugging Face ecosystem is great, and adds a lot of value even if you host the models yourself.
Sam Havens - Director of NLP Engineering, Writer


Hugging Face's AutoTrain tool chain is a step forward towards Democratizing NLP. It offers non-researchers like me the ability to train highly performant NLP models and get them deployed at scale, quickly and efficiently.
Kumaresan Manickavelu - NLP Product Manager, eBay


AutoTrain has provided us with zero to hero model in minutes with no experience required.
Ben Nimmo - Founder & CTO, Orlo

FAQ

What is AutoTrain?AutoTrain is an automatic way to train and deploy state-of-the-art Machine Learning models, seamlessly
						integrated with the Hugging Face ecosystem.
					
What Machine Learning tasks are available for training?Available today: text classification, entity recognition, summarization, question answering, translation,
						tabular classification and regression, image classification and LLM finetuning.
					
Which model languages are available?Any language! We support all languages available in the Hugging Face Hub.
How is my training data secure?Your training data stays on our server, and is private to your account. All data transfers are protected
						with encryption.
					
How much does it cost?Based on the hardware you choose, you are billed per minute for the resource usage during training time.
						More information can be found in the pricing page.
					
What training data formats are supported?CSV, TSV, JSON, ZIP files, depending on the type of task.
Website
Models 
Datasets 
Spaces 
Tasks 
Inference Endpoints 
Expert Acceleration Program 
Company
About 
HF Store 
Brand assets 
Terms of service 
Privacy 
Jobs 
Press 
Resources
Learn 
Documentation 
Blog 
Forum 
Service Status 
Social
GitHub 
Twitter 
LinkedIn 
Discord 








