




















Single Sign-On (SSO)






Hugging Face







					Models

					Datasets

					Spaces

					Docs




			Solutions
		

Pricing
			






Log In
				
Sign Up
					




Hub documentation
			
Single Sign-On (SSO)





					Hub
					



Search documentation


EN









🤗 Hugging Face Hub


Repositories


Getting Started with Repositories


Repository Settings


Pull Requests & Discussions


Notifications


Collections


Webhooks


Repository size recommendations


Next Steps


Licenses


Models


The Model Hub


Model Cards


Gated Models


Uploading Models


Downloading Models


Integrated Libraries


Model Widgets


Inference API docs


Models Download Stats


Frequently Asked Questions


Advanced Topics


Datasets


Datasets Overview


Dataset Cards


Gated Datasets


Uploading Datasets


Downloading Datasets


Integrated Libraries


Dataset Viewer


Datasets Download Stats


Data files Configuration


Spaces


Spaces Overview


Spaces GPU Upgrades


Spaces Persistent Storage


Gradio Spaces


Streamlit Spaces


Static HTML Spaces


Docker Spaces


Embed your Space


Run Spaces with Docker


Spaces Configuration Reference


Sign-In with HF button


Spaces Changelog


Advanced Topics


Other


Organizations


Billing


Security


User Access Tokens


Git over SSH


Signing Commits with GPG


Single Sign-On (SSO)


How to configure OIDC with Okta in the Hub


How to configure SAML with Okta in the Hub


How to configure SAML with Azure in the Hub


Malware Scanning


Pickle Scanning


Secrets Scanning


Moderation


Paper Pages


Search


Digital Object Identifier (DOI)


Hub API Endpoints


Sign-In with HF




Join the Hugging Face community
and get access to the augmented documentation experience
		

Collaborate on models, datasets and Spaces
				

Faster examples with accelerated inference
				

Switch between documentation themes
				
Sign Up
to get started
 









   Single Sign-On (SSO) The Hugging Face Hub gives you the ability to implement mandatory Single Sign-On (SSO) for your organization. We support both SAML 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC) protocols. This feature is part of the Enterprise Hub.  How does it work? When Single Sign-On is enabled, the members of your organization must authenticate through your Identity Provider (IdP) to access any content under the organization’s namespace. Public content will still be available to users who are not members of the organization. We use email addresses to identify SSO users. Make sure that your organizational email address (e.g. your company email) has been added to your user account. When users log in, they will be prompted to complete the Single Sign-On authentication flow with a banner similar to the following:   Single Sign-On only applies to your organization. Members may belong to other organizations on Hugging Face. We support role mapping: you can automatically assign roles to organization members based on attributes provided by your Identity Provider.  Supported Identity Providers You can easily integrate Hugging Face Hub with a variety of Identity Providers, such as Okta, OneLogin or Azure Active Directory (Azure AD). Hugging Face Hub can work with any OIDC-compliant or SAML Identity Provider.  How to configure OIDC/SAML provider in the Hub We have some guides available to help with configuring based on your chosen SSO provider, or to take inspiration from: How to configure OIDC with Okta in the Hub How to configure SAML with Okta in the Hub How to configure SAML with Azure in the Hub  Users Management    Session Timeout This value sets the duration of the session for members of your organization. After this time, members will be prompted to re-authenticate with your Identity Provider to access the organization’s resources. The default value is 7 days.  Role Mapping When enabled, Role Mapping allows you to dynamically assign roles to organization members based on data provided by your Identity Provider. This section allows you to define a mapping from your IdP’s user profile data from your IdP to the assigned role in Hugging Face. IdP Role Attribute Mapping A JSON path to an attribute in your user’s IdP profile data. Role Mapping A mapping from the IdP attribute value to the assigned role in the Hugging Face organization. You must map at least one admin role. If there is no match, a user will be assigned the default role for your organization. The default role can be customized in the Members section of the organization’s settings. Role synchronization is performed on login. 


←Signing Commits with GPG
How to configure OIDC with Okta in the Hub→

Single Sign-On (SSO)
How does it work?
Supported Identity Providers
How to configure OIDC/SAML provider in the Hub
Users Management
Session TimeoutRole Mapping









