












Easy Stovetop 'Nduja Mac and Cheese Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 




















































 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Mac & Cheese





Stovetop Pasta





Cheddar Cheese





Gruyere





Pastas








Easy Stovetop 'Nduja Mac and Cheese Recipe
Gooey, spicy, meaty mac and cheese—all it takes is four pantry-friendly ingredients and 10 minutes of your time.






By

Sasha Marx








 

Sasha Marx




 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Editor

Sasha is a senior culinary editor at Serious Eats. He has over a decade of professional cooking experience, having worked his way up through a number of highly regarded and award-winning restaurant kitchens, followed by years spent in test kitchens for food publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 17, 2023

























































(4)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

The soft, spreadable texture and high fat content of 'nduja allows it to easily emulsify and meld into the sauce, giving our famous easy, creamy stovetop macaroni and cheese a spicy, meaty, funky kick.Cooking in a small volume of water concentrates the starch from the pasta, helping the cheese form a creamy emulsion.Evaporated milk contains protein micelles, which help keep an emulsified sauce smooth and creamy.Every ingredient in this recipe has an extended, pantry-friendly shelf life, making this the perfect pasta for a quick and easy weeknight dinner.


It's hard to improve on the beautiful simplicity of Kenji's three-ingredient stovetop macaroni and cheese, known in some circles as the "6-6-6 mac," but if there's one ingredient that can easily meld into the mac mix, it's our favorite Calabrian sausage, 'nduja.



'Nduja's high fat content allows it to quickly and easily emulsify into a creamy sauce with the evaporated milk and melty cheese in this four-ingredient recipe (well, technically six ingredients if you want to be like that, counting water to cook the pasta and a tiny pinch of salt to season it). All of the ingredients, including the 'nduja, have long shelf lives, making this a perfect pantry-friendly comfort food recipe.




March 2020




Recipe Details
Easy Stovetop 'Nduja Mac and Cheese Recipe




Active
10 mins




Total
10 mins






Serves
2
to 4 servings




Gooey, spicy, meaty mac and cheese—all it takes is four pantry-friendly ingredients and 10 minutes of your time.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




6 ounces (170g) elbow macaroni


Kosher salt


6 ounces (180ml) evaporated milk


6 ounces (170g) grated mild or medium cheddar cheese, or any good melting cheese, such as Fontina, Gruyère, or Jack


2 ounces (1/4 cup; 56g) 'nduja (see notes)















Directions





Place macaroni in a medium saucepan and add just enough cold water to cover. Add a pinch of salt and bring to a boil over high heat, stirring frequently with a heat-resistant flexible spatula to prevent pasta from sticking. Continue to cook, stirring frequently, until water has been almost completely absorbed and macaroni is just shy of al dente, about 6 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Immediately add evaporated milk, stir to combine, and bring to a boil. Add cheese, stir to incorporate, then add 'nduja, continuing to stir to combine.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Reduce heat to low and cook, stirring continuously, until cheese is melted, 'nduja is fully emulsified, and liquid has reduced to a creamy sauce, about 2 minutes longer. Taste for seasoning, adding more salt if necessary ('nduja is quite salty, so pasta shouldn't need any additional salt). Serve immediately.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

3-quart saucier or medium saucepan, heat-proof flexible spatula


   Notes  

'Nduja is a spicy spreadable pork salume that originates from the southern Italian region of Calabria. In the US, it can be purchased at specialty shops that carry salumi/charcuterie, Italian markets, or online from producers like Tempesta Artisan Salumi. Look for 'nduja made with just four ingredients: pork, Calabrian chiles, salt, and lactic acid.



For a milder and less 'nduja-forward mac and cheese, or if you're looking to make your 'nduja supply last as long as possible, reduce the amount of 'nduja by half, and use just 1 ounce (2 tablespoons; 28g).


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

Macaroni and cheese is best enjoyed immediately.


   Read More  

A Guide to 'Nduja: Italy's Funky, Spicy, Spreadable Salume
Pasta With Spicy 'Nduja-Tomato Sauce
Spicy 'Nduja Mayonnaise










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




489
Calories


31g 
Fat


27g 
Carbs


26g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 2
to 4




Amount per serving


Calories
489


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 31g
39%


Saturated Fat 14g
72%


Cholesterol 90mg
30%


Sodium 977mg
42%


Total Carbohydrate 27g
10%


Dietary Fiber 1g
5%


Total Sugars 7g


Protein 26g




Vitamin C 3mg
15%


Calcium 468mg
36%


Iron 3mg
18%


Potassium 487mg
10%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















17 Quick Dinner Recipes in 20 Minutes or Less





















A Guide to 'Nduja: Italy's Funky, Spicy, Spreadable Salume





















Pasta With Spicy 'Nduja-Tomato Sauce Recipe





















35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















27 Quick and Easy Pasta Recipes





















The Food Lab's Ultra-Gooey Stovetop Mac and Cheese Recipe





















Classic Baked Macaroni and Cheese Casserole


























Creamy Baked Mac and Cheese





















3-Ingredient Stovetop Mac and Cheese Recipe





















'Nduja Scrambled Eggs Recipe





















Everything You Can Do With a Can of Evaporated Milk





















Macaroni and Cheese Waffles Recipe





















Think Outside the Box: 17 Macaroni and Cheese Recipes





















Pasta al Tonno (Pasta With Tomatoes and Tuna)





















The Best Slow-Cooked Bolognese Sauce Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



