












Glazed Carrots With Burnt Honey and Gochugaru Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 




















































 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Carrots





Stovetop Vegetables





Vegetable Sides





Thanksgiving Side Dishes





Winter Sides








Glazed Carrots With Burnt Honey and Gochugaru Recipe
To tame the sweetness of these Korean banchan-inspired glazed carrots, we burn the honey and spike the sauce with chile pepper, ginger, and a splash of vinegar.






By

Sasha Marx








 

Sasha Marx




 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Editor

Sasha is a senior culinary editor at Serious Eats. He has over a decade of professional cooking experience, having worked his way up through a number of highly regarded and award-winning restaurant kitchens, followed by years spent in test kitchens for food publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated September 28, 2020

























































(5)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Sasha Marx

































Why It Works

Blooming honey to the point of being slightly burnt imparts pleasant bitterness to balance its natural sweetness.Cooking carrots with stock, butter, and honey at a rapid boil with plenty of stirring and swirling provides the mechanical agitation necessary to build a strong emulsion.Soy sauce and fish sauce give the dish savory depth, while gochugaru provides floral heat, for an assertive banchan-style side dish that can hold its own with other components of a large meal.


Glazed carrots are a classic vegetable side dish that employs a trés French technique called glaçage, for which vegetables are cooked at a rapid boil with stock, butter, and a sweetener such as sugar or honey until tender and the liquid has reduced to a glossy emulsified sauce. Agitation from the boiling, along with swirling and stirring the pan that the vegetables are cooking in, provides the mechanical action required to build a stable emulsion for the glaze (just as you would for a silky pan sauce or properly finished pasta). Inspired by Korean sweet soy-glazed potato banchan, this version of glazed carrots pairs Bugs Bunny's vegetable of choice with an assertively seasoned glaze made with gochugaru (Korean chile flakes) and burnt honey that strikes the perfect balance between savory, sweet, and spicy.



One recurring problem with glazed carrots (and other root vegetables) is that the dish can easily veer into too-sweet territory, making them more of a pre-dessert than savory side dish. Carrots are already high in natural sugars—in order to survive cold conditions, carrots convert starch to sugar to act as natural form of anti-freeze. Chef Dan Barber of Blue Hill at Stone Barns is well-known for farming "high-Brix" (read: super-sweet) carrots by leaving them in the soil through multiple freezes before harvesting, to push the vegetable's sugar content to the limit. So, it's no surprise that combining a naturally sweet vegetable with an added sweetener like honey or sugar in a glaze can make for an overly saccharine dish.



For these glazed carrots, we combat this problem by first intentionally burning the honey, blooming it in a saucepan until it darkens to a molasses shade of dark brown. This imparts subtle bitterness, balancing the honey's natural sweetness. Gochugaru is then added along with the carrots, minced ginger, and garlic. The floral heat of the Korean pepper flakes and fresh ginger complements and tempers the sweetness of the carrots and honey. Stock, butter, soy sauce, and fish sauce are then added to the mix and brought to a boil.



The carrots get covered and cooked until just tender and the liquid has emulsified. For the final couple of minutes, the carrots are cooked uncovered, to allow the glaze to reduce to a glossy coating. The finishing touch is a dash of rice wine vinegar and sesame oil off-heat, to lend acidity and bolster the toasty, subtle bitterness of the burnt honey. This is a quick-cooking vegetable side that is anything but an afterthought, and fits in just as well with a weeknight meal as with a holiday feast.



Celebrate the Sides With a Korean-American Banchan Thanksgiving




Recipe Details
Glazed Carrots With Burnt Honey and Gochugaru Recipe




Active
5 mins




Total
15 mins






Serves
2
to 3 servings




To tame the sweetness of these Korean banchan-inspired glazed carrots, we burn the honey and spike the sauce with chile pepper, ginger, and a splash of vinegar.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




2 tablespoons (30ml) honey


12 ounces (340g) carrots, peeled and cut into 2 1/2-inch-long by 1/2-inch-thick batons (about 6 small carrots)


One 1-inch piece fresh ginger, peeled and minced (about 2 teaspoons; 12g)


2 medium garlic cloves (10g), minced


2 tablespoons (14g) coarse ground gochugaru (Korean chile flakes)


1 cup (240ml) homemade chicken or vegetable stock, or store-bought low-sodium stock, plus extra as needed


2 tablespoons (28g) unsalted butter


2 teaspoons (10ml) soy sauce


1 teaspoon (5ml) fish sauce


1 teaspoon (5ml) unseasoned rice wine vinegar


1 teaspoon (5ml) toasted sesame oil


Thinly sliced chives, scallions, or garlic chives, for garnish















Directions





In a 3-quart saucier or saucepan, add honey and cook over medium-high heat, stirring constantly with a rubber spatula, until honey darkens and takes on the color of molasses, 2 to 3 minutes.















Add carrots, ginger, garlic, and gochugaru, season lightly with salt, and continue to cook, stirring constantly, until mixture is very aromatic, about 30 seconds. Add stock, butter, soy sauce, and fish sauce, stir to combine, and bring to a boil. Cover saucepan with lid or round of parchment paper, and adjust heat as necessary to maintain rapid boil. Cook, stirring and swirling saucepan occasionally, until carrots are tender and give very little resistance when poked with a cake tester or paring knife, 7 to 9 minutes. If liquid drops to below 1/2-inch during cooking, top up with additional stock or water.















Remove lid and continue to cook carrots at a rapid simmer, stirring and swirling constantly, until sauce is reduced to a syrupy glaze, about 1 minute. If at any point the glaze over-reduces and the emulsion breaks (a visual indicator of this is fat separating and making the liquid look greasy), add water or stock, 1 tablespoon (15ml) at a time, stirring and swirling constantly, until emulsion is stabilized once more. Remove from heat, stir in rice wine vinegar and sesame oil, and season with salt to taste. Divide between small individual serving dishes, sprinkle with chives or scallions, and serve.














   Special equipment  

3-quart saucier with lid


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

Glazed carrots are best served right away, but they can be refrigerated in an airtight container for up to 3 days. Reheat in a saucepan over medium-high with 2 tablespoons (30ml) additional water or stock. Bring to at a rapid boil and cook, swirling constantly to re-build the glaze emulsion, until carrots are warmed through.


  This Recipe Appears In  

Celebrate the Sides With a Korean-American Banchan Thanksgiving










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




182
Calories


9g 
Fat


24g 
Carbs


3g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 2
to 3




Amount per serving


Calories
182


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 9g
12%


Saturated Fat 5g
25%


Cholesterol 20mg
7%


Sodium 607mg
26%


Total Carbohydrate 24g
9%


Dietary Fiber 4g
13%


Total Sugars 16g


Protein 3g




Vitamin C 13mg
65%


Calcium 54mg
4%


Iron 1mg
5%


Potassium 413mg
9%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Stir-Fried Anchovy Banchan (Myeolchi Bokkeum) Recipe





















Korean-Style Fire Chicken (Buldak) With Cheese Recipe





















19 Carrot Recipes to Root for This Season





















Gingery Glazed Carrots Recipe





















Kimchi-Brined Fried Chicken Sandwich Recipe





















Gamja Bokkeum (Korean Sweet Soy-Glazed Potatoes)





















Baechu Kimchi (Napa Cabbage Kimchi)





















Tteokbokki From 'The World's Best Spicy Food'


























Roasted-Carrot Salad With Peanut-Sesame Mole Recipe





















Chicken Marsala





















20 No-Cook Recipes for Summer





















Sigeumchi Namul (Korean Marinated Spinach Banchan)





















Oi Muchim (Korean Marinated Cucumber Banchan)





















Beurre Blanc





















Grilled or Roasted Carrots With Sweet Soy Glaze





















Pommes de Terre Fondantes (Fondant Potatoes)






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



