












Spice Hunting: Gochujang, Korean Chile Paste






















































 




 



 





























 



 



































 




























 




























































































 







 







 













 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Pantry Guides





Korean Cuisine








Spice Hunting: Gochujang, Korean Chile Paste






By
Max Falkowitz

Updated February 26, 2020













Trending Videos














 






























Is there room for another chile paste in your life—and your crowded fridge?



Yes, friends, yes there is.



Sriracha's lovely. Harissa is a fiery punch in the mouth with flavor to match. But if you're looking for a sweeter, funkier flavor from your chiles, gochujang (pronounced go-choo-jong) is the thing for you.



Gochujang is what gives Korean kimchi and tofu stews their sweet heat, bibimbap rice bowls their piquancy and rice cakes their sauce. You have to love a culture that uses chile as one of its mother sauces.



Gochujang is made from red chiles, glutinous rice,* and soy beans. It's a little hot, a little fermented funky, and more than a little sweet. What it lacks in chile fire it makes up in rounded meaty flavors and the ripe twang of a good stinky cheese. Unlike other chile pastes, gochujang adds as much meaty edge as spice, which makes it a go-to main ingredient, not just a condiment.



Which doesn't actually contain gluten, but is sticky like glutinous bread dough—especially when mashed. Glutinous rice also has a mildly sweet flavor.












Who needs the Scoville scale?.



Packages frequently display a heat scale; in my gochujang's case the scale is in the completely arbitrary (to my knowledge) Gochujang Hot taste Unit (GHU). 3 is about right for my tastes—mild enough to use like ketchup in small doses, but plenty intense in larger amounts.


  How to Use Gochujang  



"If you have gochujang and fish stock you will never go hungry."


If you have gochujang and fish stock you will never go hungry. Simmer some vegetables, meat, or fish in a broth made of the two. Serve over noodles or rice. Or turn into a stew with some kimchi or tofu stirred in. It's the kind of shortcut cooking that doesn't taste like it, food to nourish with little notice.



Since it's both round in flavor and mild in heat (well, for a chile paste anyway), gochujang really elevates vegetable dishes. Eggplant, cauliflower, and green beans all do very well when blistered in a pan, cooked till tender, and sauced with gochujang and soy sauce or broth (toss with scallions and toasted sesame seeds for crunch). It also makes a quick marinade for thin slices of beef or pork destined for the grill or a stir fry. Add some rice vinegar and soy sauce, let sit for a few hours, and cook away.













The sweet, fermented flavor of gochujang pairs perfectly with smoky ingredients. Bacon's probably the best to add smoke, meatiness, and highly flavored fat to round out the chile. Here's my new weeknight dinner: render bacon till really crisp, fry Korean rice cakes in the bacon fat, then stir fry half a head of napa cabbage in what's left. Combine everything together with enough gochujang to make a sauce for a meal that takes almost no effort but reaps boundless rewards.



The more traditional version of the dish is called ddok boki, made with boiled rice cakes and a sweet, spicy sauce. But while I can't say my version is authentic to...anything (especially since I slip in some Japanese shichimi togarashi), the crisp-chewy rice cakes and blistered cabbage in a smoky, spicy sauce are hard to beat.



It's also proof that gochujang isn't limited to the Korean culinary pantheon. Though its fermented flavor does somewhat limit its versatility as a go-to chile paste, it's a beautiful shortcut ingredient that doesn't compromise on flavor. Try some on your meatloaf instead of a ketchup glaze, or stir a spoonful into a pot of black beans with cumin and orange peel. Gochujang has a long shelf life when kept in the fridge, so don't be surprised if you're scraping the edges of your container before you know it.



Fried Rice Cakes with Bacon and Cabbage Recipe














































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Tteokbokki (Korean Rice Cakes)





















15 Stews to Amp Up the Cozy





















How to Stock a Korean Pantry: Jeot, Jang, and More Ingredients to Know





















33 Stir-Fry Recipes For Your Wok





















What to Do With Kimchi





















Kimchi 101: It Ain't Just Cabbage





















Homemade Shin Cup-Style Spicy Korean Ramyun Beef Noodle Soup





















The Serious Eats Guide to Shopping for Asian Noodles


























19 Grilled Burger Recipes to Make All Summer Long





















Kimchi-Brined Fried Chicken Sandwich Recipe





















32 Standout Sauce Recipes for Burgers





















Phat Phrik Khing With Tofu and Long Beans (Thai Dry-Curry Stir-Fry) Recipe





















Bossam (Korean Boiled-Pork Wraps) Recipe





















Filipino Food 101: Recipes to Get You Started





















Around the World in Hot Sauce: An Illustrated Tour of 18 Varieties





















Easy Vegetable Pancakes Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



