












Perilla Leaves























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 












 



















 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















World Cuisines





Asian Cuisines





East Asian Cuisines




Perilla Leaves
Often sold as "sesame leaves," perilla leaves are an aromatic, intensely flavored herb. Here's our guide.






By

Chichi Wang








 

Chichi Wang




 


 



Chichi Wang wrote a variety of columns for Serious Eats including The Butcher's Cuts, in addition to other stories. Born in Shanghai and raised in New Mexico, Chichi took her degree in philosophy but decided that writing about food would be more fun than writing about Plato.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 31, 2023












Trending Videos














 






























If you live in an area with a big Asian community then you've probably seen little old Asian ladies hawking produce on the side of the road. They stand out in the hot sun selling produce at very cheap prices, and they are there day after day. Right now the Korean ladies are selling stacks of perilla leaves, though if you go to any Korean grocery store, you'll see them being sold as sesame leaves. I don't understand why they refer to perilla leaves as sesame leaves, but they do.



Perilla is actually the term for a number of different species of plants in the mint family. The Japanese use shiso, which is smaller and mintier than the broad, rounded perilla leaves favored by the Koreans.



The flavor of perilla, grassy with notes of anise or licorice, is pleasing like any other herb. The real advantage is their size. You can do more with the bigger leaves than just chop them up and use them as a garnish (though doing so is perfectly acceptable and delicious).













Perilla leaves can be stir-fried with garlic and veggies, deep-fried in a batter of flour and eggs, pickled or marinated, or used as wrappers. (Or any combination of these things, like wrapping something in perilla then battering it and deep-frying in oil.) If I have extra perilla leaves on hand, I like to use them as I would lettuce, wrapping the leaves around rice and bits of seasoned fish or pieces of grilled meat.



One of my favorite preparations for Korean perilla leaves is to marinate the leaves in a mixture of soy sauce, sesame oil, vinegar, garlic, and lots of Korean chili powder. The result is a mildly pickled, spicy side dish that takes no effort and is as addicting as kimchi.



Marinated Perilla Leaves





July 2011







East Asian Cuisines





Korean Cuisine

















































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Chả Giò (Vietnamese Imperial Rolls)





















Marinated Perilla Leaves





















Do You Know Your Tsukemono? A Guide to Japanese Pickles





















The Serious Eats Field Guide to Asian Greens





















How to Stock a Korean Pantry: Jeot, Jang, and More Ingredients to Know





















Korean Beef Bulgogi Burritos Recipe





















Guide to Ramen Varieties





















20 No-Cook Recipes for Summer


























The Serious Eats Guide to Shopping for Asian Noodles





















How to Eat Korean Food (Without Embarrassing Yourself)





















Kimchi-Brined Fried Chicken Sandwich Recipe





















33 Stir-Fry Recipes For Your Wok





















What to Do With Kimchi





















20 Basil Recipes to Use Up Your Summer Bounty





















Black Sesame Buttermilk Biscuits Recipe





















A Seaweed Primer: How to Use Kelp, Nori, Wakame, and More






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



