












The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 5: Tri-Tip






















































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Beef Guides





Grilling Guides








The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 5: Tri-Tip






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 10, 2018













Trending Videos














 






























If you're from outside of Santa Maria, California, you may not have heard of tri-tip, the large, tender, triangular muscle cut from the bottom sirloin of a steer. If you're from Santa Maria, on the other hand, you can bet your bowl of pinquito beans that you've had more than your share of the cut.



It's the primary cut used for Santa Maria-style Barbecue (check out James Boo's article on the subject here), a regional barbecue style that's not well known outside of central California, and, by some standards, wouldn't qualify as "real" barbecue at all.



See, Santa Maria-style barbecue is technically a fast-cooking method—that is, the meat is cooked over an open pit burning with red oak and cooked just until medium-rare. No low-and-slow smoking, no breakdown of connective tissue (which, luckily, tri-tip is very low in), no fancy barbecue sauces. Just seasoned beef, grilled, sliced, and served with a bowl of native pinquito beans, a tomato salsa, and buttery garlic bread.



Sounds pretty damn good to me.



A versatile cut, it's also often used in competition chili for its leanness (though why that's a requisite for competition chili is beyond me).


  Shopping  

Also Sold As: Santa Maria Steak, Newport Steak (when cut into individual steaks), aguillote baronne (France), punta de anca, punta de Solomo, or colita de cuadril (Latin America), maminha (Brazil).













Where It's Cut From: The bottom sirloin, from the muscle group that controls the steers back legs (it applies its force to the steer's kneecap).



As you can see, it's a pretty lean cut. Texturally, it resembles a flat cut brisket, though it doesn't have nearly as much outside fat. Flavorwise, I'd peg it closer to a eye round roast. It's not huge on beef flavor or fat, so it's a generally good idea to season it generously and serve it with a flavorful sauce.













If you have a choice between Prime and Choice grades, I'd go with the prime—this is a case where you're going to want all the fat you can get to stave off the dry-meat problem.



The traditional Santa Maria-style barbecue calls for black pepper, salt, and perhaps a bit of garlic rubbed onto the meat before cooking. Personally, I like to go with a somewhat heartier-flavored spice rub with paprika, a bit of cumin, cayenne, and some brown sugar. I find that the flavor really helps boost the meat once sliced.



Because of its tapered shape, this is an ideal cut of meat if you want to serve a family that likes their meat cooked to different donenesses. The narrow tip will cook faster than the fatter butt-end, giving you a range of temperatures to choose from.













Just like when cooking a big fat steak, the key to even cooking, juicy meat, and a nice crust is to start the sucker over the cooler side of the grill with the lid on (you can add some soaked wood chunks to the coals—it takes well to smoke), and cook it to within 5 to 10°F of it's target pull temperature (which, in turn is 5°F lower than it's target final temperature). For medium-rare, that's about 115° to 120°F.













After that, slide it on over to the hot side and cook it until nicely charred all around. Pull the sucker off, let him rest for about 10 minutes (it is, after all, a big cut of meat), then slice thinly against the grain with a sharp knife.













You can serve it with whatever kind of sauce you like. The traditionalist in me says to go with a tomato and celery-studded Santa Maria-style Salsa. The who-cares-as-long-as-it-tastes-good-person in me often tells the traditionalist in me to shut the hell up.


  Get The Recipes:  

Santa Maria-Style Barbecue Tri-Tip
Santa Maria-Style Salsa
Sweet and Spicy Grilled Tri-Tip













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Food Lab's Guide to Inexpensive Steak for the Grill: 5 Cuts You Should Know





















Tri-Tip Beef Roast With Shallot Jus Recipe





















The Food Lab's Definitive Guide to Grilled Steak





















The Tri-Tip Torta from El Pollo Norteño in Santa Maria, CA





















What Are the Best Cuts of Beef for Stew?





















7 Myths About Cooking Steak That Need to Go Away





















Perfectly Grilled T-Bone Steak





















Sous Vide Steak Guide | The Food Lab


























The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 4: Flap Meat (Sirloin Tip)





















How to Dry Age Beef





















Santa Maria-Style Barbecue Tri-Tip Recipe





















Can I Dry Age Beef At Home? | The Food Lab





















Pan-Seared, Butter-Basted Thick-Cut Steak Recipe





















Homemade Tacos Al Pastor





















10 Tips for Better Burgers | The Food Lab





















Slow-Roasted Boneless Leg of Lamb






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



