












Toast and Grind Whole Spices for More Complex Flavors























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 












 



















 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















How-Tos





Techniques





Stovetop Guides




Toast and Grind Whole Spices for More Complex Flavors






By

Sho Spaeth








 

Sho Spaeth




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Editor

Sho Spaeth has worked in publishing and media for 16 years. Prior to joining Serious Eats, he worked at The New York Times for a decade. Sho has written for Time Magazine, The New York Times, The Baffler Magazine, Conde Nast Traveler, among other publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 10, 2018












Trending Videos














 






























I suppose it's a little late to ask that you add anything to your list of New Year's resolutions, many of which have already been broken by some, if not all, of you. (I'm not judging; I'm right there with some, if not all, of you.) But consider that a new year offers a sterling opportunity to take stock of your spice cabinets and clear out all those dusty powders that haven't seen the light of day in a few months...or years. And it's also an opportunity to swear off those big, budget-friendly plastic containers of the ground stuff—many of them resembling monuments to flavor instead of truly useful ingredients, and destined to spend their lives mostly untouched—and replenish your spice racks and shelves with smaller quantities of whole spices instead.













Why? Well, for one thing, whole spices look cool. For another, they'll stay fresh for far longer than their powdered counterparts. For a third, they give you flexibility, since some recipes call for whole spices and others call for the ground version.



But the best reason to buy whole spices is that they can be toasted on the stovetop and freshly ground, adding more (and often better) flavor to a dish than any but the newest powders ever could. Toasting heats volatile flavor compounds in the spices, which makes them change shape and recombine to form new, more complex aromas. The process is crucial, for instance, in drawing out more flavor from whole star anise, cumin, coriander, and cloves in Kenji's Best Chili Ever, which I can confirm from personal experience to be pretty, well, best. Toasting also has the benefit of drying spices out slightly, making it easier to grind them into a fine powder.













You might be asking yourself: Why not just toast my preground spices instead? There are a couple of reasons. First, you probably don't know how recently your ground spices were ground. Second, because of their much greater surface area, ground spices are more prone to burning and likely to release their volatile compounds more easily, diminishing flavor in the final dish.



The process is simple. Dump the whole spices in a small skillet, set it over medium heat, and stir and toss the spices until they're nicely fragrant. That's it! They're ready to be ground. (Keep in mind that it's also never a bad idea to toast whole spices even if they'll be used whole, such as in a pho broth or chai—you'll still reap the benefits of their intensified flavor.)












J. Kenji López-Alt



The main drawback of using whole spices is that you'll need either a cheap coffee grinder or a sturdy mortar and pestle to pulverize them, but either is well worth the investment. Once you have a small store of whole spices and a tool to crush them with, there's nothing to stop you from enjoying a world of recipes that call for freshly ground spice mixtures, such as our Xi'an-Style Oven-Fried Chicken Wings, Adana Kebabs, Seekh Kebabs, or even a cumin-laced chickpea salad.







Stovetop Guides

















































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Best Chili Ever





















Adana Kebabs (Ground Lamb Kebabs)





















Carne Adovada (New Mexico-Style Pork With Red Chiles) Recipe





















What is Coriander?





















Bloom Ground Spices in Oil for Better Flavor





















How to Make Fermented Hot Sauce





















What to Do With Leftover Vanilla Bean Pods





















22 Grilled Beef Recipes for the Ultimate Memorial Day Cookout


























Kofte Kebabs With Spicy Harissa Yogurt Sauce and Grilled Flatbread (Minced Lamb Kebabs) Recipe





















How Often Should You Flip a Burger?





















How to Stock an Indian Pantry: Spices, Dals, and More Essential Ingredients





















Use the Microwave to Dry Your Herbs for Long-Lasting Intense Flavor





















How to Make Tadka





















Salsa Negra (Sinaloan Salsa for Seafood)





















What to Do With Dried Chiles: Recipes, Cooking Techniques, and Shopping Tips





















The Science of Marinades






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



