












Insanity Burger From 'Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food'


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Burgers





Stovetop Beef





Beef Chuck





Sandwiches








Insanity Burger From 'Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food'
Classic flavor all juiced up and a little weird, in a wonderful way. 






By

Maggie Mariolis








 

Maggie Mariolis


Maggie Mariolis is a freelance writer and recipe wrangler. A pastry gal by training, she spent three years at Food & Wine magazine.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 03, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / David Loftus
































There are those of you who might be wondering why you need yet another burger recipe, and then there are those who just can't get enough. This burger from Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food is for both of you: it delivers classic flavor all juiced up and a little weird, in a wonderful way. Oliver takes the traditional components and gets kinda nutty with them, adding slight twists that really do make this a worth-a-try-even-if-you're-sick-of-burgers burger.



The onions are dressed with vinegar, the cheese is slightly tangy Red Leicester, the bacon and pickles are...bacon and pickles. Then he takes finely chopped iceberg lettuce and mixes it into a sauce that one might say is 'special'—mayo and ketchup with chipotle Tabasco, Worcestershire, and a splash of booze (just go with it; it works and is silly good). The burger itself gets glazed with mustard and more of the smoky Tabasco while it cooks, then it's all piled on a seeded brioche bun, which has been briefly toasted in the bacon fat. Bonkers. You'll have juice up to your elbows and a plate full of run-off that you will want to wipe clean with a torn piece of bun or your tongue, depending on how insane it makes you feel.



Why I picked this recipe: I fall into the just-can't-get-enough camp.



What worked: It all worked, except for the eventual structural failure of the bun.



What didn't: Not a complaint, but just a heads-up: Things can get a little hairy if your bacon needs tending when you're supposed to be basting your burgers, and it does need to be perfectly done just at the moment your burger is ready for it, to avoid overcooking the meat. That said, his timing did work for me.



Suggested tweaks: I don't see why you couldn't cook your bacon beforehand, if you want a more relaxed experience; just remember to heat the grease back up in time to toast the buns. If you can't find Red Leicester cheese, a mild cheddar would work well in its place.





From Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food by Jamie Oliver. Copyright 2014 Jamie Oliver. Excerpted by permission of Ecco, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.



September 2014




Recipe Details
Insanity Burger From 'Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food'




Prep
20 mins




Cook
15 mins




Active
35 mins




Total
35 mins






Serves
4 servings




Classic flavor all juiced up and a little weird, in a wonderful way. 


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 3/4 pounds ground chuck steak


Olive oil


1 large red onion


1 splash of white wine vinegar


1 pinch sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


2 large gherkins


4 sesame-topped brioche burger buns


4–8 slices of smoked bacon


4 teaspoons yellow mustard


Tabasco Chipotle sauce


4 thin slices of Red Leicester cheese


4 teaspoons tomato ketchup


1/4 of an iceberg lettuce


Burger Sauce


2  heaping tablespoons mayo


1 heaping tablespoon tomato ketchup


1 teaspoon Tabasco Chipotle sauce


1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce


1 teaspoon brandy or bourbon















Directions





For the best burger, go to your butcher and ask them to grind 1 3/4 lbs of chuck steak for you. This cut has a really good balance of fat and flavorsome meat. Divide it into 4 and, with wet hands, roll each piece into a ball, then press into flat patties roughly 5 inches wide and about 3/4 inch wider than your buns. Place on an oiled plate and chill in the fridge. Next, finely slice the red onion, then dress in a bowl with the vinegar and a pinch of sea salt. Slice the gherkins and halve the buns. Finely chop the lettuce and mix with the rest of the burger sauce ingredients in a bowl, then season to taste.





I like to cook only 2 burgers at a time to achieve perfection, so get two pans on the go—a large non-stick frying pan on a high heat for your burgers and another on a medium heat for the bacon. Pat your burgers with oil and season them with salt and pepper. Put 2 burgers into the first pan, pressing down on them with a slotted spatula, then put half the bacon into the other pan. After 1 minute, flip the burgers and brush each cooked side with a 1/2 teaspoon of mustard and a dash of Tabasco. After another minute, flip onto the mustard side and brush again with another 1/2 teaspoon of mustard and a second dash of Tabasco on the other side. Cook for 1 more minute, by which point you can place some crispy bacon on top of each burger with a slice of cheese. Add a tiny splash of water to the pan and place a heatproof bowl over the burgers to melt the cheese—30 seconds should do it. At the same time, toast 2 split buns in the bacon fat in the other pan until lightly golden. Repeat with the remaining 2 burgers.





To build each burger, add a quarter of the burger sauce to the bun base, then top with a cheesy bacon burger, a quarter of the onions, and gherkins. Rub the bun top with a teaspoon of ketchup, then gently press together. As the burger rests, juices will soak into the bun, so serve right away, which is great, or for an extra-naughty experience, wrap each one in parchment paper, then give it a minute to get gorgeous and sloppy.




   Special Equipment  

Two large nonstick skillets (one can be stainless steel)


   Read More  

The Ultimate Smash Cheeseburger Recipe
Thick and Juicy Burgers Recipe
10 Tips for Better Burgers










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




972
Calories


57g 
Fat


46g 
Carbs


70g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4




Amount per serving


Calories
972


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 57g
73%


Saturated Fat 21g
104%


Cholesterol 238mg
79%


Sodium 1063mg
46%


Total Carbohydrate 46g
17%


Dietary Fiber 2g
8%


Total Sugars 11g


Protein 70g




Vitamin C 3mg
17%


Calcium 204mg
16%


Iron 8mg
47%


Potassium 816mg
17%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















In-N-Out vs. Five Guys vs. Shake Shack: The First Bi-Coastal Side-By-Side Taste Test





















A Better Big Mac Recipe





















In-N-Out's Double-Double, Animal Style Recipe





















Quadruple Chile Cheeseburgers Recipe





















Grilled Black-Olive Burger With Japanese Vinegar Recipe





















The Best BLT (Bacon, Lettuce, and Tomato) Sandwich





















In-N-Out Burger Secret Menu Guide





















32 Standout Sauce Recipes for Burgers


























19 Grilled Burger Recipes to Make All Summer Long





















35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















The Turkey Club Shawarma Sandwich With Pork Belly and Enhanced Mayo Recipe





















The Ultimate Bacon Cheeseburgers Recipe





















The Fully Loaded Iceberg Wedge Salad





















Easy Oven-Cooked Pulled Pork Recipe





















Classic Mayo-Dressed Tuna Salad Sandwiches





















Homemade Burger King Whopper-Style Cheeseburgers






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



