












American-Style Chocolate Buttercream Recipe
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Desserts





American





Gluten-free Desserts





Chocolate








American-Style Chocolate Buttercream Recipe
American buttercream + Dutch cocoa + ganache = double-chocolate frosting






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated December 06, 2022

























































(8)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































In This Recipe


Expand





Use American Buttercream for Fast and Easy Frosting




Making the Ganache




Sift Powdered Sugar and Cocoa for a Smoother Texture




Knowing When to Stop Whipping









Why It Works

A small batch of dark-chocolate ganache boosts the flavor and richness of an otherwise traditional American buttercream.High-fat Dutch cocoa powder contains more fat and less starch than supermarket brands, for better flavor and richness.A small amount of instant espresso adds a subtle bitterness that keeps the sweetness in check, without lending an overt coffee flavor to the frosting.


I don't think a baker can ever have too many recipes for any given dessert, and that's as true of buttercream as it is of chocolate chip cookies. That's because what's "best" can vary depending on what ingredients one has on hand, how much time is available for the project, and/or what dietary considerations may be required, not to mention the degree of chocolate intensity your current craving may demand.



After you've made a yolk-rich yellow cake, it's only natural to give those wayward egg whites a purpose with a batch of Swiss meringue buttercream spiked with chocolate. Likewise, a white cake based on egg whites may necessitate a chocolate twist on French buttercream instead.



Meanwhile, to accompany cake recipes based on whole eggs, like my vanilla butter cake or chocolate skillet cake, an eggless option, like whipped ganache, might make more sense.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



But there are many other ways to make an eggless chocolate icing—some of which may require a bit of skill in the candy-making department, such as the old-school fudge frosting and new-school marshmallow buttercream from my cookbook, BraveTart: Iconic American Desserts. We even have an eggless chocolate frosting here on Serious Eats that's based on homemade sweetened condensed milk.


   Use American Buttercream for Fast and Easy Frosting  

While all of these recipes can deliver big chocolate flavor, those techniques can be time-consuming, to say the least. Which is what brings me to yet another approach to chocolate frosting, this time using a fast and easy, thermometer-free technique that combines the intensity of ganache (a mixture of cream and chocolate) with the speed of an American buttercream (a mixture of butter and powdered sugar).












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



For those on the fence about American buttercream, which has something of a reputation for excessive sweetness and a slightly gritty consistency, rest assured that those qualities aren't inherent to the style. Rather, they reflect high-sugar/low-moisture formulas, as well as recipes based on conventional powdered sugar.



You can read a more in-depth walk-through of my solution to these issues with my own approach to American buttercream, but it largely hinges on using less sugar, more liquid, and an organic, tapioca-based powdered sugar.



That last bit is a subject worth exploring all on its own, so you may want to read up on the differences between organic and conventional powdered sugar as well.



Suffice it to say, my approach to a chocolate version of American buttercream takes advantage of all these techniques, with a not-insubstantial amount of high-fat Dutch cocoa powder added to the mix as well. But instead of a last-minute splash of cream to help dissolve the powdered sugar, I take the opportunity to incorporate an extra quarter pound of chocolate via a dark ganache.


   Making the Ganache  

The key here is to start with a good-quality chocolate bar rather than chips, one with a cocoa percentage somewhere around 70%. Any lower, and the frosting will be too sweet, while edging higher can cause the frosting to seize; for some of our favorite easy-to-find brands, see the Serious Eats guide to the best supermarket dark-chocolate bars for baking.



Making the ganache is a ridiculously simple affair: Finely chop the chocolate, then, off heat, whisk it into a pot of cream that's been brought to a bare simmer. When the mixture is silky-smooth, set the pot aside to cool.



Truth be told, this recipe will work with ganache in a wide range of temperatures, so long as the butter temperature is adjusted to compensate, but that kind of temperature-averaging can be tricky for beginners. So, for safety's sake, I recommend cooling the ganache to about 75°F (24°C).



This can be done passively, simply by setting the pot of ganache aside, or the process can be sped along by scraping the ganache onto a plate, where it can be spread into a thin layer for more rapid cooling.


   Sift Powdered Sugar and Cocoa for a Smoother Texture  

In either case, with the ganache out of the way, sift the powdered sugar and cocoa over a bit of softened butter. Again, a wide range of temperatures for the butter can technically work, particularly when you're using a warmer ganache. But for beginners especially, it's best to eliminate variables where you can, so I recommend using butter that's about 65°F (18°C).












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



You might be tempted to think that sifting is a superfluous step, and that any lumps of cocoa or powdered sugar will be beaten out with a stand mixer's paddle attachment, but take it from me: Not so. Organic powdered sugar is particularly prone to lumping, so please, do take the time to sift at this stage!



After sifting, I beat the powdered sugar, Dutch cocoa, and butter together until it's creamy, soft, and pale, scraping as needed with a flexible spatula along the way. The timing of this step will vary depending on the power of a given mixer, so, while you can expect it to take five or six minutes, the visual and textural cues are the most important here. (For a better idea of what to look for, see the images in the recipe steps below.)



If you stopped at this stage, you'd have a very nice cocoa frosting. But the addition of ganache pushes it over the top, improving both its flavor and its consistency.


   Knowing When to Stop Whipping  

For a dense, dark frosting, stop whipping as soon as the ganache is incorporated. For one that's lighter in texture and color (if not flavor), keep whipping a few minutes more. This step is strictly a matter of your personal taste in appearance and consistency, so play around to find what you like best.



As with any buttercream, the temperature of the ingredients will have a profound impact on texture, and it can be a bit of a balancing act to get things just right. Don't hesitate to warm or cool the frosting, then re-whip until you get it where you want it.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Along those same lines, the final stage of mixing is a good time to give the buttercream a try so it can be seasoned to taste with additional salt or vanilla, as well as instant espresso powder in moderation. (The idea is to add a note of bitterness to round out the chocolate, rather than to make an overtly coffee-flavored frosting.)



In the end, you'll have a fast and easy chocolate buttercream, with a smooth consistency, that tastes rich and complex thanks to the dueling flavor profiles of Dutch cocoa and dark chocolate. It's perfect for everything from simple sheet cakes and cupcakes to layer cakes of any kind, making it a worthy addition to any baker's recipe box.




July 2019




Recipe Details
American-Style Chocolate Buttercream Recipe




Active
15 mins




Total
45 mins






Serves
24 servings




Makes
3 cups




American buttercream + Dutch cocoa + ganache = double-chocolate frosting


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




4 ounces heavy cream (about 1/2 cup; 115g), straight from the fridge


4 ounces finely chopped dark chocolate (not chips), around 72% (about 2/3 cup; 115g)


12 ounces unsalted butter (3 sticks; 340g), softened to about 65°F (18°C)


9 ounces organic powdered sugar (about 2 1/4 cups, spooned; 255g), preferably tapioca-based, such as Wholesome (see notes)


3 ounces high-fat Dutch cocoa powder (about 1 cup, spooned; 85g)


2 teaspoons vanilla extract, plus more to taste


3/4 teaspoon (3g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt, plus more to taste; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


3/4 teaspoon instant espresso powder, plus more to taste















Directions





In a small saucepan, bring cream to a simmer. Off heat, add chopped chocolate and whisk until smooth. Set aside and cool to approximately 75°F (24°C). This can be done slowly by letting the mixture cool down over time in the saucepan, or sped up by transferring the ganache to a wide, shallow container to increase its surface area; the faster method will cool the ganache in about 30 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Place butter in the bowl of a stand mixer, then sift powdered sugar and Dutch cocoa on top to ensure no lumps of either remain in the frosting. Fit stand mixer with a paddle attachment and mix on low until dry ingredients are fully incorporated.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add vanilla, salt, and espresso powder, then increase speed to medium and beat until frosting is creamy and smooth, pausing along the way to scrape bowl and beater as needed. This will take about 6 minutes, although the exact timing will vary depending on the power of the mixer and the temperature of the ingredients.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Reduce speed to medium-low and add ganache. Once ganache is fully incorporated, pause to scrape bowl and beater with a spatula, then resume mixing a few seconds longer to ensure the frosting is homogeneous. Extending the beating time can create a lighter, paler frosting with a higher yield, while reduced beating can create a denser, darker frosting with a lower yield; which you choose depends on your personal preference. At this stage, the buttercream can be doctored to taste with additional salt, vanilla, or instant espresso powder.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Use buttercream right away or transfer to a large zipper-lock bag, press out air, and seal. The buttercream can be refrigerated for up to 2 weeks or frozen for up to several months. (The main issue with longer storage in the freezer is odor absorption, not spoilage.) Bring buttercream to approximately 72°F (22°C) and re-whip before use; see the troubleshooting guide below for tips on adjusting its consistency.





Troubleshooting: If too cold, the frosting may seem stiff, greasy, or curdled; to fix, melt 1/4 cup frosting until liquid, then return it to the bowl and re-whip. Conversely, if too warm, the frosting may seem soft, loose, or runny; to fix, refrigerate the bowl of frosting for 10 minutes, then re-whip. It can take time to achieve the right temperature and consistency, but it gets easier with practice.




   Special Equipment  

Stand mixer, nonreactive fine-mesh strainer, flexible spatula


   Notes  

If you don't have organic powdered sugar on hand, conventional powdered sugar will be fine; just add 1/2 teaspoon plain, unsulfured molasses (not blackstrap) along with the salt and vanilla to create a similar depth of flavor. Check out our guide to the differences between conventional and organic powdered sugar for more detail.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

In a large zipper-lock bag, the buttercream can be refrigerated for up to two weeks or frozen for up to several months.


   Read More  

Creamy Eggless Chocolate Frosting
Chocolate Swiss Buttercream
Chocolate Cake with Whipped Ganache Frosting
The World of Buttercreams: 6 Varieties to Try at Home










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




220
Calories


15g 
Fat


19g 
Carbs


3g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 24




Amount per serving


Calories
220


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 15g
19%


Saturated Fat 8g
42%


Cholesterol 36mg
12%


Sodium 52mg
2%


Total Carbohydrate 19g
7%


Dietary Fiber 3g
10%


Total Sugars 11g


Protein 3g




Vitamin C 0mg
0%


Calcium 7mg
1%


Iron 5mg
27%


Potassium 15mg
0%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Chocolate Swiss Buttercream Recipe





















Easy Peanut Butter Frosting Recipe





















A Guide to Cake Frosting





















A Creamy, Fluffy Chocolate Frosting Without Eggs or Powdered Sugar





















Flour Frosting (a.k.a. Ermine Frosting) Recipe





















Bumpy Cake (Chocolate Cake with Vanilla Buttercream and Chocolate Fudge) Recipe





















The World of Buttercreams: 6 Varieties to Try at Home





















Chocolate Cherry Layer Cake Recipe


























Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















American Buttercream Recipe





















The Best Milk, Dark, and Extra-Dark Chocolate Bars for Baking





















Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake





















Texas Sheet Cake Recipe





















Essential Baking Ingredients for Cake, Cookies, Breads, and More





















Old-Fashioned Jelly Roll





















Homemade Oreo Cookies Recipe | BraveTart






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



