












The Restaurant Secret for Quick, Make-Ahead Risotto

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Italian








The Restaurant Secret for Quick, Make-Ahead Risotto
A simple, common restaurant trick that allows you to prep and cook risotto ahead of time.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 03, 2023













Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt































You sit down at an Italian restaurant and order the special of the day: risotto alla Milanese. Ten minutes later, it's sitting in front of you. Perfectly al dente individual grains of rice, in a creamy sauce that flows across the plate like liquid-hot magma. Delicious.



But wait a minute... Anyone who's made risotto at home knows that it takes at least half an hour to cook, and that leftover risotto turns mushy even a few hours later. How the heck did they get that perfect risotto in front of you within 10 minutes?



It's a pretty simple and common restaurant trick, and one that I employ at home when I know that I've got a tight week coming up and want a no-prep, 10-minute meal ready to go in the fridge. Here's how it works.



As hot risotto sits, rice grains start to absorb excess moisture, going from perfectly al dente to mushy. Meanwhile, the saucy liquid binding them together suffers doubly as it gets robbed of water and cools down, turning from creamy to stodgy in no time. There's no real way to fix this. The key, instead, is to undercook the risotto and cool it rapidly to prevent that rice from overcooking, so you can easily finish cooking it later.



At home, I generally start by cooking up a batch of risotto on the stovetop. When the rice is about 75% cooked—no need to be precise; it should be starting to get tender but still have a chalky, raw bite in the center—I pour it out into a wide vessel.* Quarter sheet pans are perfect for the job. The key is to spread the rice out into a thin, uniform layer so that it cools rapidly and evenly. Giving it a few gentle stirs as it starts to cool can hasten the process.



*If you're cooking your risotto in a pressure cooker, just cut the cooking time down by about 25%, and leave out the last spoonful of liquid.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Once it's cooled, you can transfer that half-cooked risotto to sealed containers and keep it in the fridge for up to a week.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



When you're ready to serve it, just scoop the half-cooked risotto into a skillet and add a ladleful of stock or water.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Heat the risotto, stirring the whole time. If your risotto recipe uses heat-sensitive ingredients, like green vegetables or seafood, it's a good idea to leave them out of the initial cook and stir them in fresh when you're reheating.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Keep stirring and cooking, adding liquid a little at a time, until you hit that perfect point at which the rice is tender, but still retains some bite, and the sauce is creamy. Depending on how far you took the risotto the first time, this should take between three and five minutes.



Finish off the risotto however the recipe calls for it to be finished (generally with a grating of Parmesan cheese), and you're good to go.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



If you want to streamline your week even more, try cooking a double batch of risotto and scooping out half the rice onto a rimmed baking sheet three-quarters of the way through cooking. Then let it cool so it's ready to go for later in the week, while you finish off the other half on the stovetop and serve it for dinner. One prep for two meals is a pretty solid formula for good eating with minimal effort.


  Get The Recipes:  

Creamy Risotto alla Milanese (Saffron Risotto)
Perfect Risotto




May 2017













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Key Techniques for Perfect Risotto





















19 Easy Italian Recipes for Any Night of the Week





















Perfect (Almost) No-Stir Risotto





















The Best Slow-Cooked Bolognese Sauce Recipe





















Pasta alla Genovese (Pasta With Neapolitan Beef and Onion Ragù)





















A Week's Worth of Quick and Easy Breakfasts, Lunches, and Dinners





















Mushroom and Asparagus Risotto Recipe





















31 Quick Dinner Recipes for Your Instant Pot or Pressure Cooker


























Pasta alla Norcina (Creamy Pasta With Sausage) Recipe





















The Complete Guide to How to Plan Thanksgiving Dinner





















Pasta al Tonno (Pasta With Tomatoes and Tuna)





















Creamy Risotto alla Milanese (Saffron Risotto) Recipe





















Classic Lasagna Bolognese





















The Right Way to Sauce Pasta





















Pasta ai Funghi (Creamy Pasta With Mushrooms)





















Hoppin' John






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



