












Spanakopita (Greek Savory Greens Pie) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Method





Baking





Savory




Spanakopita (Greek Savory Greens Pie) Recipe
For a twist on the classic, this version of Greek spanakopita uses an assortment of greens and tender herbs in addition to spinach.






By

Sohla El-Waylly








 

Sohla El-Waylly




 


 

 


 



Sohla El-Waylly is a culinary creator, video host, and CIA graduate whose work can be found on Serious Eats, Bon Appetit, The New York Times, Food52, YouTube, and more.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated July 13, 2023
























































(16)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































In This Recipe


Expand





Fresh Greens and Good Feta




Assembly and Baking









Why It Works

Massaging the greens and combining them with warm sautéed aromatics wilts them sufficiently, eliminating the need for precooking.Gently folding crumbled feta into the greens leaves large curds running through the pie.Trahanas (or rice, barley, or couscous) in the filling absorbs moisture from the greens as they cook in the oven, keeping the phyllo crisp.Cutting the pie into portions before baking ensures clean slices.


I don’t know if it’s just me, but in the '90s, I saw a lot of spanakopita. I had never eaten it before, and yet for an entire decade it somehow became my go-to appetizer. Phyllo and spinach always lived in the freezer, allowing me to fold up a few triangles in a flash. The spanakopita I knew was brimming with watery spinach and overwhelmed by cheese, but it was easy and cheap, and it filled a buffet, so I kept making my guests suffer through it.



It wasn’t until a recent trip to Greece that I realized what spanakopita could be. At a farm up in Mount Pelion, we were served a pie made with layers of just-rolled sheets of phyllo, generously bathed in extra-virgin olive oil and loaded with mixed greens from the farm. This pie was complex and earthy, and tasted of summer. This was not the spiritless pastry I'd peddled at so many dinner parties. I realized I didn’t know spanakopita at all.


   Fresh Greens and Good Feta  

Surprisingly, giving this dish a makeover doesn’t require much extra effort—it’s all about the ingredients. Using a combination of tender greens and herbs gives the pie subtle complexity, while making the upgrade from frozen to fresh greens ensures the best flavor. Good olive oil adds richness and depth, giving heartiness to this vegetarian dish.



I also like to use a true Greek feta, which is made with all sheep's and goat's milk—never cow's milk—and that little hit of funk goes a long way in a simple dish like this.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I chose a mix of fresh spinach, rainbow chard, arugula, and watercress for this pie, but feel free to keep it simple and use all spinach if you prefer. Any combination works, but I especially like the peppery arugula and watercress against the sweet, vegetal flavors of spinach and chard.



This recipe is a great way to use up whatever tender greens and herbs you have in the fridge, allowing you to mix and match. Just be sure to avoid hearty greens, like kale and collards, which require a longer cooking time.



I stick to tender varieties for the herbs, such as the dill and parsley I’ve used here. Tender herbs have delicate aromatics, which won’t overwhelm this pie; woody herbs, like rosemary and thyme, are too strongly flavored, resulting in a soapy taste if used in the large quantity that’s called for in this recipe.



Because greens are made up primarily of water, they lose a ton of volume once cooked. In order to get a nicely stuffed spanakopita, many recipes call for precooking the greens before adding them to the pie, so they don’t further shrink in the oven and collapse the pastry.



To keep things simple, I instead massage the raw greens, which sufficiently wilts them and allows me to skip the precooking step. This also means I can fully brown the phyllo without worrying about overcooking the greens.



After chopping up the greens and their tender stems, I add extra-virgin olive oil, salt, and freshly ground black pepper. I then gently massage the greens with the seasoning until everything is evenly mixed and the greens begin to wilt, reducing in volume. There’s no need to fully wilt the greens at this point; they'll continue to wilt as they sit.



Next, I sweat sliced scallion and garlic scapes in olive oil over medium heat. I would normally use sliced garlic cloves, but I couldn’t resist tossing in a couple of in-season garlic scapes instead. The goal of sweating these aromatics is to cook them enough to make them tender and fully bring out their flavor without browning them.



Once they're sweated, I add the warm aromatics to the greens, which wilts them further. I then add an egg and trahanas to the greens, evenly mixing both in before finishing the filling with large curds of Greek feta.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Trahanas is small, pebbly crumbles that look like grains or small pasta. It's made from a fermented porridge of grain and dairy, which is then dried and broken up into small, rice-sized pieces. Originally a way to preserve dairy in Greece, the Balkans, and the Middle East, it's still a popular addition to soups and savory pie fillings to absorb moisture and hold them together.



Trahanas can be made with yogurt or buttermilk, for the tangy “sour” variety, or unfermented milk for the mild “sweet” style. Here, I’ve used sour trahanas to absorb any excess moisture from the greens. Once cooked, the flavor of the sour trahanas mimics that of the feta, giving the filling an extra cheesy zip. If you don’t have trahanas, you can swap it out for bulgur, rice, or couscous.


   Assembly and Baking  

With the filling squared away, I turn my attention to the phyllo. If you've never worked with it before, phyllo is tissue-thin sheets of delicate pastry, layered and baked until they're crisp and flaky.



Working with phyllo can be frustrating if you expect to preserve the gossamer leaves; I roll with the punches instead, fully prepared to break, tear, and crack the pastry. Luckily, phyllo is more beautiful when it’s crumpled and scrunched.



After fully thawing the pastry, I unroll the sheets and cover them with a barely damp kitchen towel. Phyllo will dry out right before your eyes, so even for a quick dish like this one, I keep it covered while I work. I brush my pie pan with olive oil before layering on the phyllo, one sheet at a time, brushing each with more oil.



Once the pie plate is lined, I fill it with the greens before folding up the overhang and draping more phyllo over to top the pie. I drizzle it all with more olive oil to help it bake up golden and light.



To finish the spanakopita, I cut the pie into portions before it goes into the oven—phyllo bakes up so crisp and brittle that the only way to cut clean slices is to score it in advance of baking.



I bake the pie until the phyllo folds become shatteringly crisp and golden, with touches of deep brown on the wayward pleats. The greens will grow tender and succulent, while their moisture plumps up the trahanas. Pops of briny feta run through the minerally greens, giving the spanakopita a creamy contrast to the crunchy phyllo crust.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It’s best to allow the pie to rest a few minutes before you dig into the steamy dish. It can also be served at room temperature, and I even like it cold, straight from the fridge and eaten with my hands, like a slice of leftover pizza.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



As with a lot of stuff from the '90s, I’m happy to have this oldie back in my life. This is more than just a dusted-off version—it's fully revamped and ready for a new decade.




July 2018




Recipe Details
Spanakopita (Greek Savory Greens Pie) Recipe




Prep
10 mins




Cook
50 mins




Active
30 mins




Cooling Time
15 mins




Total
75 mins






Serves
8 servings




For a twist on the classic, this version of Greek spanakopita uses an assortment of greens and tender herbs in addition to spinach.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




8 cups chopped mixed greens and tender stems, gently packed (about 12 1/2 ounces; 350g), such as spinach, watercress, arugula, and Swiss chard (see note)


1 cup chopped mixed tender herbs and tender stems (about 2 ounces; 60g), such as dill, parsley, chervil, and chives


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil (2 ounces; 50g), plus more


1 1/2 teaspoons (6g) kosher salt


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper


3 sliced scallions, both white and green parts (about 2 ounces; 60g)


2 cloves garlic (10g), sliced


2/3 cup trahanas (3 ounces; 90g); rice, barley, or couscous can substitute (see note)


1 large egg


1/2 pound (226g) Greek feta, crumbled


6 sheets phyllo dough, thawed















Directions





Getting Started: Adjust oven rack to lower-middle position. Preheat oven to 400°F (200°C). Brush a 9-inch glass pie plate (either deep-dish or standard size will work with this recipe) generously with olive oil and set on a parchment-lined rimmed baking sheet.





For the Filling: In a large bowl, combine chopped greens, chopped herbs, 1/4 cup olive oil, salt, and black pepper. Massage together to gently wilt the greens, then set aside.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






In a small sauté pan over medium heat, add 1 tablespoon olive oil, scallions, and garlic and cook until wilted, about 5 minutes. Add the hot mixture to the greens and combine to further wilt the vegetables. Add the trahanas (or your substitute of choice) and egg and thoroughly combine. Once everything is well mixed, fold in the crumbled feta.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






To Assemble the Pie: Unroll thawed phyllo and keep it covered with a moist kitchen towel while working. Working with 1 sheet at a time, lay phyllo so that it is centered in the pie pan with the excess draping over the rim and brush generously with about 1 tablespoon olive oil. Repeat with 3 more sheets of phyllo, each sheet placed perpendicular to the previous one, brushing with olive oil before adding the next.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add greens mixture to phyllo-lined pie. Fold excess phyllo over greens and drape remaining 2 sheets of phyllo over the top. Drizzle with more olive oil. Slice into portions using a serrated knife. Bake in preheated oven until golden brown, about 45 minutes. Allow to cool at least 15 minutes before serving.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Glass pie plate, rimmed baking sheet, pastry brush


   Notes  

Feel free to mix and match whatever quick-cooking greens you have on hand—we recommend a combination of spinach, watercress, Swiss chard, and arugula, but as long as you avoid hearty greens, like kale and collards, any mix can work in this pie. If you prefer to keep things traditional, this recipe works with all fresh spinach as well.



Trahanas is a type of pasta made from fermented dairy and grain. It is traditionally used in Greek cuisine for thickening soups or to absorb moisture from the greens in spanakopita. An equal amount of rice, barley, or couscous can be used in its place.


   Read More  

Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet
Three-Cheese Hearty Greens and Puff Pastry Tart
Spanokopita-Style Hand Pies
Borek (Armenian Spinach and Cheese Turnovers)
Spinach, Egg, and Feta Breakfast Pockets






Savory





Vegetarian





Greek





Vegetarian Snacks & Appetizers





Feta Cheese















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




942
Calories


57g 
Fat


96g 
Carbs


12g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8




Amount per serving


Calories
942


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 57g
73%


Saturated Fat 22g
109%


Cholesterol 48mg
16%


Sodium 1315mg
57%


Total Carbohydrate 96g
35%


Dietary Fiber 5g
17%


Total Sugars 2g


Protein 12g




Vitamin C 18mg
91%


Calcium 219mg
17%


Iron 4mg
20%


Potassium 453mg
10%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Best Spanakopita Has More Than Just Spinach





















Borek (Armenian Spinach and Cheese Turnovers)





















One-Skillet Dinner: Chicken Spanakopita Pot Pie





















16 Arugula Recipe to Savor Its Assertive, Peppery Bite





















Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet Recipe





















16 One-Pot Chicken Recipes for Easy, Breezy Weeknight Dinners





















9 Greek Recipes for Memorable Mediterranean Meals





















15 Easy One-Pot Vegetarian Dinners


























25 Nutty, Tasty, and Filling Recipes With Whole Grains





















Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe





















34 Recipes Starring Fresh, Ripe Summer Tomatoes





















Oysters Oaxacafeller Recipe





















20 No-Cook Recipes for Summer





















Chicken and Leek Pie Recipe





















24 Zucchini Recipes For Your Summer Bounty





















Eggplant Tart With Goat Cheese, Honey, and Nigella Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



