












Fall for Fall's Other Fruit With These 17 Pear Recipes
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 












 



















 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Ingredients





Fruit





Pear




Fall for Fall's Other Fruit With These 17 Pear Recipes






By

Rabi Abonour








 

Rabi Abonour




 


 

 


 



Rabi Abonour is a planner specializing in transportation, but has also been a photojournalist, writer, and editor for several online and print publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 10, 2018












Trending Videos














 

Vicky Wasik































Around this time of year, when orchards begin to overflow with sweet, juicy fruit, it's apples that get most of the attention, but I'm even more excited for pears. Pears come in just as many delicious varieties as apples, and they have plenty of uses in the kitchen other than eating out of hand. Need some convincing? Below are 17 recipes that incorporate the sometimes-unfairly-overlooked pear in creative ways, including mixed into pancake batter, juiced into cocktails (and mocktails), and stirred into a marinade for beef. They're all you'll need to get the most out of the season's other fruit this year.


   Breakfast and Sweets  
  Oatmeal Pancakes With Pears and Pecans  










Sydney Oland



As satisfying as it can be, a bowl of oatmeal isn't the only way to eat oats for breakfast—mixing them into pancake batter makes a heftier, more filling pancake that bears up well under the lightly browned pears and chopped pecans in this recipe. Mix all the oats in whole for a heartier, rustic texture, or grind half of them in a food processor for smoother cakes.



Get the recipe for Oatmeal Pancakes With Pears and Pecans »


  Rum and Pear Pancakes  










Sydney Oland



A pancake topping of ripe pears softened in butter and spiked with a shot of warming rum sounds fantastic, right? Wouldn't it be even better if you could make sure that those flavors worked their way into every bite? We do just that by incorporating grated pear and rum directly into the pancake batter, for cakes that are sweet, fluffy, and just a touch boozy.



Get the recipe for Rum and Pear Pancakes »


  Pear and Concord Grape Pie  










Lauren Weisenthal



A pie filled with pears alone can end up too mild-tasting, while one made with only the assertive sweet-and-tangy-ness of Concord grapes can be overwhelming. The Goldilocks solution is combining the two fruits—the marriage of subtly sweet pears and tart grapes seems just right. Adding an ounce of tapioca flour or potato starch creates a filling that holds together nicely.



Get the recipe for Pear and Concord Grape Pie »


  Apple and Pear Tarte Tatin  










Lauren Weisenthal



For this variation on a classic tarte Tatin, we caramelize the two fruits in a rich syrup of butter, sugar, and apple cider, then bake it all in a flaky puff pastry crust. While you can try making your own puff pastry, it's a lot of work, and store-bought dough works well. The result is a lovely tart of tender seasonal fruits nestled in a crisp, buttery shell—ideal for showing off at your next dinner party, if you're feeling a little fancy.



Get the recipe for Apple and Pear Tarte Tatin »


  Pear, Riesling, and Ginger Sorbet  










Max Falkowitz



This sorbet recipe was inspired by the traditional dish of pears poached in wine, itself an easy and elegant dessert. You'll need the right kind of wine for the sorbet to work—a moderately sweet Riesling, with strong acidity and about 12% ABV. A little spicy fresh ginger complements both the Riesling and the pears very well.



Get the recipe for Pear, Riesling, and Ginger Sorbet »


  Pear-Cardamom Muffins  










Carrie Vasios Mullins



Cardamom, a powerful, earthy spice that we love in baked goods, joins mild pears in these not-too-sweet muffins. Because it's so strongly flavored, we cut the cardamom with softer cinnamon and nutmeg. Buttermilk adds a light tang to the batter and helps keep the crumb moist.



Get the recipe for Pear-Cardamom Muffins »


  Pear-Cardamom Caramel  










Emily Teel



Cooked pears and cardamom combine again here to make a fudgy, fruity caramel; a pinch of salt and a dash of ground ginger deepen its complexity. It's perfect for topping ice cream or folding into bread pudding, and it'll last a couple of weeks in the refrigerator—provided, of course, that you don't eat it all by the spoonful first.



Get the recipe for Pear-Cardamom Caramel »


   Savory Dishes  
  Pearsauce or Applesauce Bread  










Donna Currie



Pearsauce, if you've never heard of it before, is quite similar to applesauce, and not only is it similarly tasty, it's also useful in many of the same applications. Its appearance in this recipe doesn't make the bread sweet—at least, not sweeter than your typical sandwich loaf—but it does lend a healthy dose of moisture. Look for a brand that's relatively low in sugar, and keep in mind that you might have to adjust the amount of flour depending on how liquid the pearsauce turns out to be.



Get the recipe for Pearsauce or Applesauce Bread »


  Roasted Pear Salad With Endive, Pomegranate, Blue Cheese, and Hazelnut Vinaigrette  










J. Kenji López-Alt



The deep, nutty sweetness of roasted pears adds a wonderful dimension to fall and winter salads. The best salads have lots of contrasting flavors and textures, and this one delivers: bitter endive and frisée, peppery arugula, funky blue cheese, crunchy hazelnuts, and vibrant, juicy pomegranate seeds, all combined with the rich, sweet flavor of browned pear slices.



Get the recipe for Roasted Pear Salad With Endive, Pomegranate, Blue Cheese, and Hazelnut Vinaigrette »


  Baby Spinach Salad With Pears, Red Onions, Cranberries, and Toasted Hazelnuts  










Jennifer Segal



This spinach salad reprises the combination of sweet pears and crunchy hazelnuts, but gets its color from tart dried cranberries instead of pomegranate seeds. Thin slices of red onion add some welcome pungency, but to keep them from overwhelming the more delicate flavors in the salad, we soak them briefly in water to soften their bite.



Get the recipe for Baby Spinach Salad With Pears, Red Onions, Cranberries, and Toasted Hazelnuts »


  Blue Cheese, Pear, and Hazelnut Smørrebrød (Danish Open-Faced Sandwich)  










Vicky Wasik



Rugbrød is a dense sourdough rye bread that's popular in Denmark; spread with butter, it's the base for the open-faced sandwich called smørrebrød. You can top smørrebrød with just about anything—here, we rely on the (by now tried-and-true) combination of sliced pear, blue cheese, and toasted hazelnuts. Any dark rye bread will do if you can't find true rugbrød.



Get the recipe for Blue Cheese, Pear, and Hazelnut Smørrebrød (Danish Open-Faced Sandwich) »


  Korean Nachos  










Morgan Eisenberg



These genius mashup nachos are topped with bulgogi, caramelized kimchi, and a gochujang-laced cheese sauce. Where does pear fit in, you ask? We add the fruit (preferably Asian pear, though Bosc will also work) to the marinade for the beef, where it both adds sweetness and helps tenderize the meat.



Get the recipe for Korean Nachos »


  Cold Korean Noodle Soup With Asian Pear and Cucumber (Mul Naengmyun)  










Daniel Gritzer



The crisp and almost grainy texture of Asian pear makes it worthy of inclusion in more than just marinades. Here, we julienne the pear and use it, along with hard-boiled egg, pickled radishes, and cucumber, to top a refreshing chilled noodle soup with sliced beef. This dish is served ice-cold, so use a broth that's fairly light on gelatin to keep the consistency slushy, not icy.



Get the recipe for Cold Korean Noodle Soup With Asian Pear and Cucumber (Mul Naengmyun) »


  Slow-Cooked Korean Short Ribs With Green Onion and Pear  










Jennifer Olvera



Asian pear again serves as a garnish here, lightening up braised short ribs enough to make them appropriate for this time of year. Their flavor comes from a kalbi-style marinade, made with bracing Chinese black vinegar and balanced by sweet brown sugar and apple juice. Feel free to make the short ribs a day or two ahead of time, but save the garnishes for just before serving.



Get the recipe for Slow-Cooked Korean Short Ribs With Green Onion and Pear »


   Drinks  
  Sparkling Bourbon Pear Cocktail  










Autumn Giles



With just me and one or two friends to think about, I love mixing cocktails. But at a larger gathering, it's just not practical to make individual drinks from scratch. Premade mixers translate into less time behind the bar and more time having fun with your guests. In that spirit (no pun intended!), this cocktail starts with a premixed base of earthy-and-sweet roasted-pear purée, maple syrup, and bourbon. To serve, just combine the base with bubbly sparkling wine and garnish with spicy ground cloves.



Get the recipe for the Sparkling Bourbon Pear Cocktail »


  Tangy Kumquat-Pear Juice  










Maggie Hoffman



The key to making a nonalcoholic cocktail that really works? Incorporating zero-proof ingredients that mimic the bitterness and heat of booze. This simple drink, based on Anjou pear juice, gets its kick from ginger and a little astringency from whole juiced kumquats—peel, seeds, and all.



Get the recipe for Tangy Kumquat-Pear Juice »


  DIY Pear Liqueur  










Marcia Simmons



Though you can find good pear liqueur in stores, it's cheap and remarkably easy to make a better-tasting version yourself at home. There's nothing to it except steeping pears and a vanilla bean in a glass jar of liquor for a couple of days, then adding a pear simple syrup to taste. We prefer brandy for our liquor base, but vodka or whiskey could work, too.



Get the recipe for DIY Pear Liqueur »







Pear

















































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Stock Your Pantry With These 15 Shelf-Stable Canning Recipes





















17 Apple Recipes That Are Ripe For Fall





















10 Cold Soup Recipes for Hot, Hot Weather





















19 Rosh Hashanah Desserts to Guarantee a Sweet New Year





















17 Recipes for Ripe, Sweet-Tart Summer Blueberries





















The Science of the Best Sorbet





















31 Breakfast Recipes for a Hungry Holiday Crowd





















Korean Beef Bulgogi Burritos Recipe


























Grilled Cheese Sandwich





















25 Nutty, Tasty, and Filling Recipes With Whole Grains





















35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















20 Strawberry Recipes to Show Off Summer's Sweetest Fruit





















12 Passover Dessert Recipes for a Sweet Finish





















Oven-Dried Grapes (a.k.a. Raisins) Recipe





















Fresh Isn't Always Best: 17 Dried-Fruit Recipes for Any Season





















19 Pancakes, Waffles, Muffins, and More Sweet Breakfast Recipes






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



