












18 Thanksgiving Pie Recipes, Because You Gotta Have Pie!

















































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 























































 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us























18 Thanksgiving Pie Recipes, Because You Gotta Have Pie!
Moist turkey is a wonderful centerpiece, and creamy mashed potatoes are a glorious side dish, but let's be honest, Thanksgiving is all about pie. Here are 18 of our favorites. 






By

Rabi Abonour








 

Rabi Abonour




 


 

 


 



Rabi Abonour is a planner specializing in transportation, but has also been a photojournalist, writer, and editor for several online and print publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 17, 2018













Trending Videos




































You can serve whatever other desserts you want, but let's be real—it's just not Thanksgiving without pie. No matter how much you stuffed yourself during dinner, it's tough to turn down a slice. I'm not interested in waxy store-bought pies, though—this is the time to go homemade, which is easier than it might sound. We have two dough recipes to get you started (a super-quick food processor version and a more old-fashioned one), and from there you just need to figure out how to fill the crust. To give you some ideas we've rounded up 18 of our favorite Thanksgiving pie recipes, from apple done two ways to chocolate cream to pecan—and don't worry, of course we didn't forget pumpkin.


   Classic Thanksgiving Pies  
  Extra-Smooth Pumpkin Pie  

I tend to avoid Thanksgiving's most iconic dessert—I've been burned by too many lousy supermarket pumpkin pies that have a grainy consistency and taste like nothing. This pie, though, gets plenty of flavor from pumpkin purée (homemade is best) and spices and it has a luxuriously smooth texture thanks to cream cheese.



Get the recipe for Extra-Smooth Pumpkin Pie


  Perfect Apple Pie  

This is everything we think of when we hear "apple pie"—a juicy yet firm filling lightly spiced with cinnamon and salt and swathed in a flaky crust. To give the filling the perfect texture we par-cook the apples in boiling water before baking, activating an enzyme that keeps them from getting mushy.



Get the recipe for Perfect Apple Pie


  Classic Pecan Pie  

I have a particular soft spot for rich, butterscotch-y pecan pie. This intensely sweet dessert is actually one of the simplest pies around—the filling is made in one bowl with corn syrup, honey, brown sugar, and vanilla. The hardest part is arranging the pecans on top, and even that's a breeze.



Get the recipe for Classic Pecan Pie


  Cranberry Apple Slab Pie  

Thanksgiving often means big groups, and normal pies unfortunately don't scale well. If you've got a lot of mouths to feed then a rustic slab pie might be a better option—this recipe, which mixes together apples and cranberries and is topped with a brown-sugar crumble, is big enough for the extended family.



Get the recipe for Cranberry Apple Slab Pie


   More Apple Pies  
  Gooey Apple Pie  

Calling an apple pie "perfect" is pretty bold, and I recognize that our other recipe isn't going to be everyone's favorite. Don't worry, though, because if you prefer your apple pie to have a gooier filling we have you covered. The trick to baking a pie thick enough to slice cleanly is to cook down the apples to drive out excess moisture, then finish the mixture with a couple of tablespoons of cornstarch.



Get the recipe for Gooey Apple Pie


  BraveTart's Easy, Old-Fashioned Apple Pie  

This recipe is perfect if you're looking for a simpler take on apple pie—not only is there no par-cooking involved, but you can actually make the filling entirely in a plastic bag. All you have to do is macerate the apples in brown sugar and spices for a few hours, then pour the mixture into a pie crust and bake.



Get the recipe for BraveTart's Easy, Old-Fashioned Apple Pie


  Apple-Pecan Bourbon-Caramel Pie  

Apple pie can be a little boring and pecan pie can be punishingly sweet—this recipe stacks the two on top of each other to give you the best of both worlds. The earthiness of the sautéed apples keep the sweet pecan/bourbon/caramel topping from getting into cloying territory.



Get the recipe for Apple-Pecan Bourbon-Caramel Pie


  Rustic Apple-Cranberry Pie  

Our Easy Pie Dough recipe makes homemade crusts relatively simple, but you still have to deal with lots of pressing and crimping once the dough has been made. If that's more work than you want to put into dessert, you may want to try a freeform pie like this tart-and-sweet apple-cranberry version.



Get the recipe for Rustic Apple-Cranberry Pie


   Cream and Custard Pies  
  Double-Chocolate Cream Pie  

If my choice is between a cream pie and a fruit pie, I'm picking the latter nine times out of ten—unless we're talking about this intense chocolate pie, which I'll go for every single time. The beautifully rich filling is made with Dutch cocoa powder, dark chocolate, and just a pinch of espresso powder, and it gets topped with a fluffy meringue.



Get the recipe for Double-Chocolate Cream Pie


  Silky Sweet Potato Pie  

I never ate sweet potato pie as a kid since I grew up in the Midwest, but the cinnamon- and nutmeg-scented dessert has since become one of my favorites. Most recipes start with canned condensed milk, but we prefer to simmer the potatoes in milk and cream until the mixture reduces down to something like a DIY condensed milk. We pair the mixture with our Flaky Pie Dough, which is able to stand up to the custard no problem.



Get the recipe for Silky Sweet Potato Pie


  Hoosier Sugar Cream Pie  

While I didn't know sweet potato pie, growing up in Indiana came with its own regional treats. The ingredient list for our sweet, custardy state pie pretty much is all in the name—it's made with sugar (a mix of white, light brown, and dark brown) and cream, plus cinnamon and a bit of flour to thicken it up.



Get the recipe for Hoosier Sugar Cream Pie


  Double-Crusted Buttermilk Pie  

Sugar cream pie is, as the name implies, quite sweet. For something with the same comforting custardy texture but a more balanced flavor, this pie is the way to go—the tangy buttermilk keeps the sugar in check. We like to bake our buttermilk pie with a top crust because the extra crispiness complements the creamy filling.



Get the recipe for Double-Crusted Buttermilk Pie


  Grasshopper Ice Cream Pie  

You definitely won't find this pie on a traditional Thanksgiving table, but it might just earn its spot on yours. This updated take on a classic '50s dessert ditches grandma's crème de menthe in favor of a splash of Fernet Branca. A topping of cocoa nib fudge adds deep dark-chocolate taste and crunch to contrast with the creamy and cool peppermint filling.



Get the recipe for Grasshopper Ice Cream Pie


  Fresh and Creamy Lime Pie  

This pie relies on the killer combo of citrus and dairy (think Creamsicle) for a mellow, sweet, and sour dessert. The crispy whole wheat crust underscores the zippy custard with its graham-like flavor, while fluffy peaks of toasted meringue recall those of a classic lemon meringue pie. It all comes together in a pie that tastes both familiar and distinctive at the same time.



Get the recipe for Fresh and Creamy Lime Pie


   Other Pies  
  Pumpkin Chocolate Swirl Pie  

Pumpkin and chocolate are almost never partnered up, and I don't really know why—rich, bittersweet cocoa and sweet squash complement each other wonderfully. This dessert pairs the two ingredients by swirling melted chocolate into a standard pumpkin pie filling.



Get the recipe for Pumpkin Chocolate Swirl Pie


  Simple Pear Galette With Vanilla  

There's a running debate here at Serious Eats about whether or not a galette counts as a pie, but I'm in charge right now and I vote yes. Sure it's a little flatter than a traditional pie, but you still get the flaky crust and fruity filling—in this case pears flavored with vanilla bean, Chinese five-spice powder, and ground cardamom.



Get the recipe for Simple Pear Galette With Vanilla


  BraveTart's Butternut Squash Pie  

You may not realize that the pumpkin purée that comes out of a can actually isn't pumpkin, but squash (for the full story on that, you'll have to check out Stella's book). With that in mind, Stella set out to make the pumpkin pie to rule them all, and all it takes is some roasted butternut squash purée and homemade sweetened condensed milk. While it's a bit more effort than a pumpkin pie made with squash out of a can, it's easy to make a couple of the components ahead of time, and the pie itself keeps very well for a couple days.



Get the recipe for BraveTart's Butternut Squash Pie


  Broiled Blueberry "Pie" With Graham Cracker Crust  

This easy blueberry "pie," cooked in a cast iron skillet, relies on the intense heat of a broiler to quickly snap it all together, from the crisp graham cracker crust to the juicy, lime-scented blueberries and the rich layer of cream cheese in between. You'll be in and out of the kitchen in no time.



Get the recipe for Broiled Blueberry "Pie" With Graham Cracker Crust













































































More Serious Eats Recipes


















Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



