












Quick and Easy Italian-American Red Sauce in 40 Minutes or Less Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Tomato Sauces





Italian-American





Quick Dinners








Quick and Easy Italian-American Red Sauce in 40 Minutes or Less Recipe
Simmered with plenty of garlic, dried oregano, red pepper flakes, and basil, this Italian-American tomato sauce can be made quickly but still has long-cooked flavor.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated September 16, 2022

























































(5)


WRITE A REVIEW






print













































In This Recipe


Expand





Starting the Sauce With Aromatics




Layering Tomato Flavor




Finishing Your Red Sauce









Why It Works

Tomato paste adds a concentrated, long-cooked flavor, making the finished sauce taste like it's been on the stove for well over an hour.Dried oregano gives the tomato sauce a classic Italian-American flavor, while basil maintains some fresh flavor in the sauce.Canned whole tomatoes tend to be higher quality than canned crushed or pureed tomatoes.


I'm using every available burner plus a portable burner plus my oven is full," Kenji messaged me when he was testing his multi-hour red sauce recipe—a sauce that is decidedly worth waiting for. But sometimes we just don't have the time to wait. Sometimes, we need some tasty sauce, and we need it in under an hour.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



So while he was slowly reducing, patiently stirring, and painstakingly perfecting his when-you-have-the-time-to-make-the-best red sauce, I was working on a complement to that: an easy version that you can whip up on a weeknight and still get dinner on the table well before it's time to put the kids (or just your tired old self) to bed. Even with its relatively quick cooking time, this sauce aims to hit all those classic Italian-American red-sauce notes. The main flavor difference between a long-cooked tomato sauce (like Italian-American red sauce) and a quicker sauce (like an Italian pomodoro sauce) is that long cooking develops sweeter, caramelized notes, along with a more concentrated tomato flavor.



So the key to a quick-cooking sauce that tastes long-cooked is to up those factors.



The sauce I arrived at tastes long-cooked and rich, thanks to the addition of some tomato paste (which we carefully fry in olive oil, further adding some caramelized notes), with plenty of garlic cooked to a sweet golden brown, a whisper of red-pepper-flake heat, and the woodsy aroma of dried oregano. Smelling it reminds me of the Italian grandmother I never had.


   Start With Aromatics  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I start with garlic cloves crushed with the flat side of my knife, and add them to some olive oil. Because garlic can burn easily when added to a hot pan, I start them together cold, then slowly bring up the heat until the garlic starts to gently bubble and sizzle in the oil.



Then I add a healthy pinch of red pepper flakes. How much you add is going to depend on how hot your flakes are—in my experience the heat level of dried chile flakes is highly variable—and how hot you want your sauce to be. It's great to start the pepper flakes in the oil, since capsaicin, the molecule that delivers the heat, is fat-soluble and therefore will more fully infuse the oil.



Once the garlic has started to turn a light golden color, I add the dried oregano, which will also infuse its volatile flavors into the oil.


   Layering Tomato Flavor  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



When the oregano is very aromatic and the garlic is a little more deeply golden, I add some canned tomato paste. Because it's already been heavily reduced, tomato paste is helpful in giving this quick sauce some of that long-cooked flavor. At first the paste will be tight and not want to cook into the oil.



But after a few minutes of stirring and mashing, the tomato paste will soften and blend with the oil. This gentle frying in the oil also helps to develop the canned tomato paste's flavor.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



When the paste has cooked in the oil for a few minutes, it's time to add the tomatoes. I usually go for whole peeled tomatoes, since they tend to be better quality than the ones that are used for the chopped and pureed varieties.



For speed, I dump the cans in into the pot, and then use an immersion blender to break them down into sauce. If you don't have an immersion blender, or if you prefer a chunkier sauce, you can crush the tomatoes by hand before adding them to the pot or use a potato masher to crush them in the pot.


   Final Additions  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I simmer the sauce over low heat for about 30 minutes, just to let the flavors meld as the sauce cooks down a little. A couple sprigs of basil add a fresh note to balance the cooked-down tomato and woodsy dried-oregano flavor.



If you want a touch of dairy sweetness to cut the pure tomato-flavor of the sauce, a couple tablespoons of butter melted in at the end do the trick. It's delicious, but I consider this an optional step. I can see some circumstances where I'd want the unadulterated taste of tomato, and others where I'd want the butter to round out the sauce's tangy edges.



I think my imaginary nonna would be proud.




September 2014




Recipe Details
Quick and Easy Italian-American Red Sauce in 40 Minutes or Less Recipe




Cook
40 mins




Active
25 mins




Total
40 mins






Serves
6
to 8 servings




Makes
5 cups




Simmered with plenty of garlic, dried oregano, red pepper flakes, and basil, this Italian-American tomato sauce can be made quickly but still has long-cooked flavor.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




2 tablespoons (30ml) extra-virgin olive oil


4 cloves garlic, crushed


Generous pinch red pepper flakes


1 teaspoon (2g) dried oregano


3 tablespoons (50g) tomato paste


2 (28-ounce) cans whole peeled tomatoes


1 large sprig basil


Kosher salt


2 tablespoons (1 ounce, or 28g) unsalted butter (optional)















Directions





In a large pot, combine oil and garlic, and heat over moderately low heat until garlic begins to very gently sizzle. Add red pepper flakes and cook, stirring, until garlic just begins to turn a light golden color, about 3 minutes. Add oregano and continue to cook, stirring, for 1 minute.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add tomato paste and cook, stirring, until paste has softened and blended with oil, about 3 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Stir in canned tomatoes and their juices, increase heat to medium-high, bring to a gentle simmer, then lower heat to maintain. Using an immersion blender, blend tomatoes until sauce is smooth. (Alternatively, use potato masher to crush tomatoes or crush tomatoes by hand before adding to pot.)











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add basil and simmer, stirring occasionally, until sauce is reduced slightly and tastes rich, about 30 minutes. Season with salt.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Discard basil. Stir in butter, if using, until melted. Use sauce right away, or allow to cool to room temperature, transfer to sealed containers and refrigerate for up to 5 days or freeze for up to 6 months.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Immersion blender (see note)


   Notes  

If you prefer a more rustic, chunky texture, or if you don't have an immersion blender, you can hand-crush the whole tomatoes with their juices before adding them to the pot, or use a potato masher to smash them in the pot; just keep in mind that will also leave chunks of crushed garlic in the sauce.


   Read More  

The Right Way to Sauce Pasta










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




74
Calories


4g 
Fat


10g 
Carbs


2g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
74


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 4g
5%


Saturated Fat 1g
3%


Cholesterol 0mg
0%


Sodium 250mg
11%


Total Carbohydrate 10g
3%


Dietary Fiber 3g
10%


Total Sugars 6g


Protein 2g




Vitamin C 29mg
145%


Calcium 29mg
2%


Iron 1mg
5%


Potassium 544mg
12%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















19 Easy Italian Recipes for Any Night of the Week





















How to Make Jarred Tomato Sauce Better…And If You Even Should





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















Pasta e Ceci (Pasta With Chickpeas) Recipe





















Fried Eggplant Sandwich With Eggplant Mayo Recipe





















34 Recipes Starring Fresh, Ripe Summer Tomatoes





















Shrimp Fra Diavolo (Shrimp and Pasta with Spicy Tomato Sauce) Recipe





















The Best Italian-American Tomato Sauce Recipe


























Penne alla Vodka Recipe





















Cioppino (San Francisco Seafood Stew)





















The Best Meatball Pizza Recipe





















Pasta al Tonno (Pasta With Tomatoes and Tuna)





















Penne With Hot-as-You-Dare Arrabbiata Sauce Recipe





















New York-Style Pizza Sauce Recipe





















Pasta Alla Zozzona (Rigatoni With Sausage, Guanciale, and Egg Yolks) Recipe





















Bucatini all'Amatriciana






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



