












Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 




















































 



 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes By Course





Desserts





Cakes





Layer Cake




Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake
This easy, moist chocolate layer cake gets deep flavor from cocoa powder and espresso powder and moisture from vegetable oil.






By

Yvonne Ruperti








 

Yvonne Ruperti




 


 

 


 

 


 



Yvonne Ruperti is a food writer, recipe developer, former bakery owner, and cookbook author. She is also an adjust professor of baking at the Culinary Institute of America in Singapore.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 03, 2023



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Robby Lozano

































Why It Works

Using vegetable oil in the batter makes the cake extremely moist.Using both cocoa and espresso powder gives the cake a deep, chocolaty flavor. Sour cream adds a welcome lactic tang.The frosting comes together quickly and without the need for chilling prior to assembling the cake.Adding corn syrup to the frosting ensures a smooth result with no grittiness.


When the anticipation of decent presents and being another year older have long since evaporated like the memories of that first kiss in the back of the movie theater, I say thank god at least for birthday cake.



This cake is the perfect party cake. Dark, dewy, cocoa-espresso cake layers nest in heavy swathes of bittersweet chocolate frosting. Sitting tall and pretty, decked out in creamy swirls of chocolate, this cake dares you to resist. But you won't, and as you dig your fork into a slice, the velvety cake gently yields under the satiny icing.



But this cake is by no means fancy or elaborate. It's a basic cake that smacks of a simple, moist Betty Crocker cake—except this one's real. And I'm sure I don't have to tell you that this cake isn't just for birthdays. Every cook should have an easy-to-make, star chocolate cake to pull out of their recipe box at a moment's notice, and today I'm offering up my all-time favorite.



And did I say easy? You bet I did. This recipe is a lickety-split "dump and stir" method. Simply whisk the wet ingredients into the dry, and in the oven it goes.



Cocoa, espresso, and tangy sour cream flavor the cake. I also swear by vegetable oil in all my chocolate cakes—nothing makes a chocolate cake more moist. For the frosting, the best tasting, quickest frosting, hands down, is based on the very first recipe that I developed for Cook's Illustrated. Unlike chocolate ganache (which you have to chill until it sets), you can frost your cake as soon as you make it. And unlike most quick frostings (which are gritty from confectioners' sugar), swapping some of the sugar for corn syrup keeps it creamy. My chocolate cravings have gotten bigger lately, so this time around I tweaked the original by making it less sweet and more chocolaty. (For the best results use a high-quality bittersweet chocolate.)



To assemble, just spread a dollop of frosting in between the two cakes and sandwich them together. If you own a cake wheel and a spatula, you can spin this cake to professional perfection. Otherwise, just do what grandma always did—use the back of a soup spoon to whirl the shiny icing into soft swirly tufts. Sprinkle on the technicolor sprinkles or sugar confetti, load it up with candles, and celebrate another year to eat cake.




February 2012

This recipe was cross-tested in 2023 and updated with more accurate measurements to guarantee best results.




Recipe Details
Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake




Prep
10 mins




Cook
22 mins




Active
45 mins




Cooling Time
75 mins




Total
107 mins






Serves
12
to 14 servings




This easy, moist chocolate layer cake gets deep flavor from cocoa powder and espresso powder and moisture from vegetable oil.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Cake:


1 1/2 cups all-purpose flour (7 ounces; 195g)


1/2 cup cocoa powder (1 1/2 ounces; 42g), see notes


1 teaspoon baking soda


1/4 teaspoon Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use half as much by volume


1 1/4 cups granulated sugar (8 3/4 ounces; 250g)


1 1/4 cups sour cream (10 ounces; 287g)


2/3 cup (160ml) vegetable oil


2 large eggs


1 teaspoon vanilla extract


1 teaspoon instant espresso powder


For the Frosting:


20 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened (10 ounces; 280g), see notes


1 cup confectioners' sugar (4 1/4 ounces;120g)


3/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon cocoa powder (2 1/2 ounces;74g)


Pinch kosher salt; for table salt, use half as much by volume


2/3 cup (160ml) light corn syrup


1 teaspoon vanilla extract


10 ounces (280g) bittersweet chocolate, melted and cooled















Directions





For the Cake: Adjust oven rack to middle position and preheat oven to 350°F (175°C). Line bottoms of two 9-inch cake pans with parchment paper and lightly coat the inside with nonstick cooking spray.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






In a large bowl, sift flour, cocoa, baking soda, and salt, and whisk to combine; set aside. In a medium bowl, whisk sugar, sour cream, oil, eggs, vanilla, and espresso powder until smooth.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






Whisk wet ingredients into dry ingredients until smooth. Divide batter evenly between prepared pans and smooth cake tops with rubber spatula. Bake until cake is just firm and a toothpick inserted into center comes out with just a few moist crumbs attached, 22 to 25 minutes.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






Let cakes cool in pans for 15 minutes. Remove cakes from pans, discard parchment, and let cool completely on wire rack, about 1 hour.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






For the Frosting: Meanwhile, in a food processor, process butter, confectioners' sugar, cocoa, and salt until combined and smooth, about 30 seconds, scraping down sides of bowl as necessary. Add corn syrup and vanilla and process until smooth, about 30 seconds, scraping down sides of bowl as necessary. Add chocolate and process until smooth and creamy, about 30 seconds. (See notes.)











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






To Assemble the Cake: Place one cake, top side up, on a serving platter or cake pedestal. Using offset spatula, spread about 1 cup frosting over top of cake layer. Center second cake, bottom side up, on top, and press lightly to adhere. Spread remaining frosting evenly over top and sides of assembled cake. To decorate, use the back of a soup spoon to make decorative swirls on the cake or decorate as desired. Serve.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano





   Special Equipment  

Two 9-inch cake pans, parchment paper, food processor


   Notes  

Be sure to use natural cocoa; do not use Dutch-processed cocoa powder as it may affect the leavening of the cake.



8-inch cake pans can be substituted for 9-inch cake pans. If using 8-inch cake pans, increase baking time to 25 to 30 minutes in Step 3. In Step 6, frost top of bottom cake layer with 3/4 cup frosting.



Do not over-soften butter or the frosting will be too loose. The butter should yield lightly to the touch (about 60ºF or 16ºC).



If the chocolate is too warm, the frosting may be too loose. If the finished frosting is too soft, briefly refrigerate until it firms up to a spreadable consistency.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

The baked, cooled cakes can be wrapped in plastic wrap and frozen for up to 1 month. Thaw at room temperature before frosting and stacking.



The frosting comes together quickly, so we recommend making it right before assembling the cake.



The assembled cake can be covered and stored at room temperature for up to 2 days or refrigerated for up to 4 days. Bring to room temperature before serving.


   Read More  

Chocolate Cherry Layer Cake Recipe
How to Crumb-Coat a Layer Cake
The Best Milk, Dark, and Extra-Dark Chocolate Bars for Baking






Layer Cake





Chocolate





Cakes















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




646
Calories


43g 
Fat


60g 
Carbs


7g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 12
to 14




Amount per serving


Calories
646


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 43g
55%


Saturated Fat 20g
99%


Cholesterol 83mg
28%


Sodium 172mg
7%


Total Carbohydrate 60g
22%


Dietary Fiber 5g
19%


Total Sugars 39g


Protein 7g




Vitamin C 0mg
1%


Calcium 55mg
4%


Iron 7mg
39%


Potassium 225mg
5%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Chocolate Cherry Layer Cake Recipe





















Bumpy Cake (Chocolate Cake with Vanilla Buttercream and Chocolate Fudge) Recipe





















We Tested 5 Cake Pans—These Are Our Two Favorites





















Peanut Butter Chocolate Cake Recipe





















Fudgy Chocolate Pretzel Cake Recipe





















Oreo Cake With Oreo Whipped Cream Frosting Recipe





















Pig Pickin' Cake (Mandarin Orange Cake With Pineapple Whipped Cream Frosting) Recipe





















Coconut Layer Cake with Chocolate Glaze Recipe


























Chocolate-Covered Candy Corn Layer Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















Chocolate Mousse Cake Recipe





















Devil's Food Cake Recipe | BraveTart





















Yellow Birthday Cake with Fluffy Chocolate Ganache Frosting





















Chocolate Decadence Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Angel Food Cake Recipe





















Easter Egg Cake Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



