













What Is an Offset Spatula?
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 












































 












 



















 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Equipment





Tools & Gadgets




Why an Offset Spatula Is the Tool I Can’t Bake Without
It’s affordable and rather endlessly versatile.






By

Eric King








 

Eric King




 


 

 


 

 


 



Eric King is a recipe developer, photographer, food stylist, and content creator.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Published February 03, 2023







We independently evaluate all recommended products and services. If you click on links we provide, we may receive compensation.
 Learn more.











 

Serious Eats / Eric King































An offset spatula can be found in the tool kit of most every recipe developer, chef, and food stylist, but I’m willing to bet a lot of home cooks don’t have one. And for why! Why shouldn’t you be able to create ethereal swoops on a chocolate buttercream-covered birthday cake, or spread ultra-even, level layers of filling and frosting, or pry pristine muffins from their tins with ease?



An offset spatula is affordable, doesn’t take up a lot of space, and can be used to perform so many kitchen tasks. Really, half of the fun of buying one is seeing what utensils you find they replace in your routine. 


   What’s an Offset Spatula?   










Serious Eats / Eric King



So, what's an offset spatula? Think of it like a butter knife (but thinner and more flexible) with a piece of stainless steel that’s about the length of its handle, or sometimes a little bit longer depending on the size. They usually come in lengths like four-and-half, eight, or 9 inches (the blade lengths) and even larger if you’re running a small bakery out of your home. What makes them “offset” is the two points where the blade bends at an angle: veering down once near the handle, then jutting out straight again to form a long, flat surface. This design makes it so that you can angle into baking tins to shimmy under brownies or frost a sheet cake without having to awkwardly angle your arm or wrist or damage your hard-won creations. 



The blade rounds at the end, which not only makes for aesthetically-pleasing swoops when spreading, but also ensures an offset spatula's more gentle than an other spatulas (like an offset turner), whose sharp points can tear into the edges of freshly-baked cake layers. Their flexibility also helps them bend to sit flush with the edges of a tin to loosen a cake layer, or angle under pieces of sheet cake. Thanks to its design, when you hold it like you would a normal spatula, the blade wants to stay parallel to your work surface (or the top of whatever you’re working on) so you can produce even layers of dough, frosting, or filling. I use mine all the time for smushing and tamping shortbread and other doughs into a tin. 



It’s the right tool for so many jobs, and after using it, you’ll wonder how you stumbled through many baking and cooking tasks without one. When I started as a baking content creator and recipe developer, my first offset spatula changed the game, making my bakes way easier—and better to look at.


   What Can an Offset Spatula Be Used For?   

Here's a quick, non-exhaustive list:



Spreading buttercream, whipped cream or other frostings on desserts 
Angling under brownies or muffins to lift them from their tin
Lifting delicate things like cookies, roasted vegetables, or tofu from a baking sheet
Getting perfectly smooth sides, or elegant swoops on frosted layer cakes 
Spreading peanut butter, jam, or other toppings on bread 
Making swirls in hummus as the perfect channels for olive oil
Shimmying under rolled-out sugar cookie dough to transfer cutouts to a baking sheet
Spreading a level layer of dough like shortbread into a tin
Spreading filling evenly and easily for cinnamon rolls, babka, or in between cake layers
Slicing and serving cake
Flipping burgers


   What's the Best Offset Spatula?  






Ateco Offset Spatula with Stainless Steel Blade














Amazon





View On Amazon

$7












Williams Sonoma Offset Icing Spatula














Courtesy of Williams Somona





View On Williams-Sonoma

$10












OXO Goodgrips Bent Icing Spatula














Amazon





View On Amazon

$12







While Serious Eats hasn't formally tested them, Ateco makes my favorite mini (4.5-inch blade) offset spatula. I like the angle of the offset, the flexibility of the metal, and that it takes up little drawer space. And at $7 (at the time of writing) it’s not a huge financial commitment. As for longer offset spatulas, I like the Williams-Sonoma Soft Touch 8-inch model because its silicone handle makes it super comfortable to use (and easy to clean in the dishwasher). And the large OXO Good Grips Bent Icing Spatula is an SE editor top pick.


   FAQs  
  Should I buy a small or a large offset spatula?   

Different sizes of offset spatulas have different strengths. In a bakery setting, larger models like the 8- or 9-inch blades (or bigger) help bakers speed up the process of transferring several items at a time from tray to cooling rack. But even if you want layer cakes with ultra-smooth sides at home, or you need a perfectly level sheet cake, a large offset spatula isn’t a bad thing to have on hand. As a matter of fact, I’ve used one to transfer a small layer cake that had been assembled, frosted, and chilled from my decorating stand to my display stand. 



If I could only choose one size to keep, though, it would be my mini. It’s a workhorse that I’m constantly reaching for—and it doesn’t take up more room than a spoon or fork would. 


  What’s the difference between an icing spatula and an offset spatula?  

The offset spatula is the cousin (or more like sibling?) to the icing spatula, which is the same thing as an offset spatula, but with no bends. Some bakers like to use these when smoothing out the sides of a cake, or to make decorative striations in buttercream. However, they really can’t do anything an offset spatula can’t do—and offset spatulas can do way more thanks to the added benefit of their angled construction. This being said, some manufacturers do call offset spatulas “icing spatulas."



We Tested 8 Mini Whisks and Came Away with Three Favorites







Tools & Gadgets





The Latest





Basic Kitchen Equipment





Equipment

















































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















We Tested 9 Offset Turners—These Are Our Favorites





















The 38 Best Gifts for Bakers, Whether They're Into Making Sourdough or Cakes





















We Tested 7 Silicone Spatulas to Find the Best Ones for Scraping, Stirring, and Mixing





















We Tested 8 Bench Scrapers—Two Were a Cut Above the Rest





















The Essential Baking Tools You Should Have at Home, According to a Pastry Chef





















The 50 Best Gifts Under $50 for Cooks and Food Lovers





















We Tested 12 Fish Spatulas to Find the Best for Flipping Fish, Burgers, and More





















Rich and Creamy Tiramisu


























14 Cake Stands That Won’t Let You Down





















Classic Chocolate Yule Log Recipe





















The Very Best Cuisinart Products, After Years of Thorough Testing





















We Took Hundreds of Readings to Find the Best Infrared Thermometers





















Why I Love My Offset Lasagna Turner Spatula





















The Piping Bags and Tips You Actually Need (According to Someone Who Bakes for a Living)





















The Best Utensil Set Is No Utensil Set





















We Tested 10 Bread Lames—Two Scored the Top Spot






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



