













The Best Pasta Bowls of 2023
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 












































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Tableware





Pasta Guides





The Latest








The Best Pasta Bowls for Heaping Servings of Spaghetti, Bucatini, Rigatoni, and More
Because a soup bowl simply won’t do. 






By

Andrea Rivera Wawrzyn








 

Andrea Rivera Wawrzyn


Contributor

Andrea Rivera Wawrzyn is a freelance food writer, recipe developer, and kitchen witch based in Salem, MA. She has worked in the food industry for over a decade. She specializes in stories about home cooking, cooking techniques, and equipment. 



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 20, 2023








We independently evaluate all recommended products and services. If you click on links we provide, we may receive compensation.
 Learn more.











 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik































The term “pasta bowls” is a bit of a misnomer. Wide, flat-bottomed bowls with shallow sides can be referred to as entree bowls, dinner bowls, bowl plates, or even “blates.” No matter what you call them, the right ones can be used for far more than just a heaping bowl of pasta alla zozzona. In my kitchen, pasta bowls also get used for the likes of salads, rice bowls, and stir-fries. Unlike soup, cereal, or mixing bowls that are deep with high sides, pasta bowls are low and shallow. However, their higher-than-a-dinner-plate sides give you the best of both worlds, enough surface area for a full meal, that also keeps the food (and any sauces or liquids) contained. 



I would happily eat nearly all of my meals out of pasta bowls, but I messed up when I embarked on the journey. The ones that I bought are slightly too large for my needs and take up more dishwasher space than I would like. To save you from this same cruel fate, we compiled a list of our favorite pasta bowls that can serve as sturdy, functional, and stylish dinnerware—no matter what you call them.


   The Criteria: What to Look for in a Pasta Bowl  










Serious Eats / Daniel Gritzer



Size: Pasta bowls come in a variety of sizes, and while only you know what size dinnerware works in your household, we have found that a diameter of seven-and-a-half to 10 inches and one-and-a-half to two inches of depth is generally large enough for a heaping portion of pasta (or whatever you’re serving) without being overwhelming.
Shape: Pasta bowls should have wide, flat bottoms and short sides. If you’re planning on using your bowls mainly for pasta, we recommend gently sloped sides, which allow the sauce to pool around the edges of the noodles. If, however, you plan to go the “blate” route and use your bowls for everything, straighter sides are great for keeping your big salads and grain bowls contained.
Material and Durability: Almost every piece of dinnerware in my kitchen is chipped. Everything from expensive dinner plates to budget-friendly bowls has buckled under the wear of time and use. While no material is truly chip-proof, look for bowls made from materials that are chip-resistant and/or are guaranteed by the manufacturer not to chip for at least a period of time. Porcelain or stoneware are both great choices for everyday use as they are both durable and chip-resistant. While porcelain is dishwasher-safe, some stoneware is not. Check the manufacturer’s care instructions and consider whether hand-washing is something you’re willing to do after dinner if you’re leaning in that direction.


   The Best Pasta Bowls  






A Simple, Inexpensive Set


Sweese Pasta Bowls (Set of 6)














Amazon





View On Amazon

$41







If you’re serving a crowd, this set of six bowls is sturdy, attractive, and dishwasher-safe. They’re made of chip-resistant porcelain and come in a variety of colors, including classic white if you’re looking to match your existing dinnerware. At $6.67 per bowl, these are a great value.


  Key Specs  

Material: Porcelain Price includes: Six bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe








A Fun, Modern-Looking Set


Hawkins New York Essential Pasta Bowls














Food52





View On Food52

$12







This set of four pasta bowls is part of a larger dinnerware line. If you’re looking to match all of your dinnerware this is a good place to start. The stoneware bowls are microwave- and dishwasher-safe and even oven-safe up to 450 degrees. They come in a range of fun colors (Mustard, Sky, and Olive are among our favorites!) and their large size makes them a great option for use as a “dinner bowl.”


  Key Specs  

Material: StonewarePrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe








A Set from a Heritage Brand


Le Creuset Stoneware Set of 4 Pasta Bowls














Amazon





View On Amazon

$72







You are likely familiar with Le Creuset’s cookware (we’ve long recommended their Dutch oven), but did you know their dinnerware is also fantastic? Senior commerce editor Riddley Gemperlein-Schirm loves her Le Creuset pasta bowls. “They are nearly impossible to break and they look scratch-free even after a year of regular use,” she says. What’s more, the bowls come in a range of pretty hues.


  Key Specs  

Material: StonewarePrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe








A Handcrafted Stoneware Bowl


Material The Open Bowl














Material





View On Materialkitchen.com






If you’re looking for a stoneware option that is durable, dishwasher safe, and beautiful, this bowl from Material is a great option. The bowl is unfinished on the bottom with a gently pebbled surface, which we think gives it a pleasing pottery-like appearance. At 8.5 inches wide and two inches deep it’s a great size for all of your dinner needs and comes in two colors. 


  Key Specs  

Material: Natural Korean clay blendPrice includes: One bowlCare instructions: Dishwasher safe








A Classic White Pasta Bowl


CB2 Contact White Pasta Bowl














CB2





View On CB2






This plain white bowl is the perfect blank canvas for highlighting a saucy pasta dish like gnocchi alla bava. Its gently sloped sides are perfect for pooling sauce and high enough to keep all kinds of food corralled. With a 9.5-inch diameter and 1.75-inch depth, it's large enough for a heaping portion. It's made of durable new bone China and is microwave- and dishwasher-safe.


  Key Specs  

Material: Porcelain Price includes: One bowlCare instructions: Hand-wash












Serious Eats / Liz Clayman








A Really Durable, Very Inexpensive Set


IKEA FÄRGKLAR, Deep Plate/Bowl—Set of 4














Ikea





View On Ikea






This set of bowls from IKEA is super budget-friendly while still being stylish. They're available in a variety of colors (though we're partial to the green and light grey) and as a set of four. Our commerce writer, Jesse Raub, is a big fan of them. "The Fargklar bowls are 1. cheap and 2. have a nice really flat bottom with only mildly sloped sides so everything rests in its sauce well while maintaining a consistent pasta bed depth, that keeps everything warm and centered," he says. Another inexpensive option we like is this set of four from Williams Sonoma.


  Key Specs  

Material: StonewarePrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik








 A Sturdy, Straight-Sided Option


Our Place Midi Bowls














Our Place





View On Fromourplace.com






This set of four ceramic stoneware bowls with a scratch-resistant interior is a durable everyday option. With 2-inch high straight sides and eight-and-a-half inches in diameter, they can contain any dinner with style (they come in four fun colors) and are microwave- and dishwasher-safe. 


  Key Specs  

Material: Ceramic stonewarePrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe








A Big Boy


Threshold Stoneware Tilley Dinner Bowls














Target





View On Target

$7







If you’re looking for something on the larger side this inexpensive and durable bowl from Target is a great choice. I have had two of these pasta bowls in my kitchen for years and their attractive, speckled exteriors remain chip-free. Their over 9-inch diameter and 1.9-inch sides will hold a borderline enormous amount of food—but do take up a bit too much real estate in the dishwasher for my liking. If you’re in the market for a set, splurge-worthy of larger bowls, the entree bowls from Made In are made of stain-resistant porcelain and come with a 1-year no-chip guarantee.


  Key Specs  

Material: StonewarePrice includes: One bowlCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe








A Hand-Finished Set with Lots of Color Options


Fable The Pasta Bowl














Fable





View On Fablehome.co

$79







Each bowl in this set is organically shaped and unique while still being durable enough for a trip through the dishwasher, into the microwave, or even the oven (up to 450°F) The bowls are 8.5 inches in diameter with 2.3-inch sloped sides and with seven color options, there’s something for every kitchen. Fable offers a 100-day trial period, so you can return them if they’re not right for you. 


  Key Specs  

Material: StonewarePrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe












Serious Eats / Liz Clayman








A Wide Rimmed Bowl


Crate and Barrel Aspen Low Bowl














Crate and Barrel





View On Crate & Barrel

$6







This elegant bowl from Crate & Barrel features a super dramatic rim that'll make you feel like you're sitting at a restaurant, eating Sasha’s pasta with spicy ‘njuda-tomato sauce, perhaps. You can order it as a single or a set of eight, depending on how many people you're looking to feed.


  Key Specs   

Material: PorcelainPrice includes: One bowlCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik








An Unbreakable Set for Outdoor Dining


Year & Day Outdoor Big Bowls














Year & Day





View On Yearandday.com






If, like me, you worry about your dinnerware chipping, look no further than these ultra-durable bowls. Designed for outdoor use, they’re still elegant enough to use at your next dinner party. They are made from plant-based, biodegradable materials and are dishwasher- and microwave-safe. At eight-and-a-half inches in diameter and a little over two inches deep, they’re the perfect size for any meal and they even come in three cute, lightly speckled colors.


  Key Specs  

Material: Natural, plant-based materialsPrice includes: Four bowlsCare instructions: Dishwasher-safe


   FAQs  
  What is the best size bowl for pasta?  

A good pasta bowl should be seven inches (or larger) in diameter. However, the more important part is the shape: As we explained above, it should have a wide bottom that's flat in the middle and then slopes gently upward along the sides. This is so that the sauce pools around the edges of the pasta. If you’re looking for something to use for more than pasta, however, straight sides can help to contain dishes other than pasta, like a big salad for instance.


  Do you need a pasta bowl?  

Sure, you could eat pasta out of any bowl. However, a good pasta bowl will make your pasta look beautiful, encourage sauce to pool around the noodles, and be relatively thick, which will help keep pasta sauce from seizing up. Additionally, pasta bowls are great for so much more than pasta. They’re an alternative to standard dinner plates for things like salads, rice bowls, and stir-fries.


  What's the difference between a pasta bowl and a soup bowl?  

A pasta bowl should have a wide bottom and gently sloping, shorter sides. A soup bowl has a narrow bottom and sides that curve more steeply upwards and are taller, which will contain soup. A pasta bowl won't be able to hold a substantial amount of soup, as you risk liquid sloshing over the sides.


   Why We're the Experts  

Andrea Rivera Wawrzyn is a freelance food writer and recipe developer and was formerly an associate editor at America's Test Kitchen.
She has developed recipes for multiple New York Times bestselling cookbooks, including an IACP award winner.
She previously reviewed grill presses for Serious Eats.



We Tested Dinnerware Sets and Found Great Options at a Variety of Price Points













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















We Tested Dinnerware Sets and Found Great Options at a Variety of Price Points





















Pasta Bowls Are the Kitchen Workhorse You've Been Missing, and Several of Our Top Picks Are Deeply Discounted Today





















The Best Soup Bowls for Every Kind of Soup





















The Best Le Creuset Gear, According to Our Exhaustive Testing





















The Best Made In Products, After Many Years of Testing





















The Best All-Clad Kitchen Gear, According to Our Exhaustive Testing





















The Best Staub Kitchen Equipment, According to Our Exhaustive Testing





















We Tested 16 Nonstick Skillets and Still Don't Think You Should Spend a Ton on One


























Cooking on a Glass Stovetop? We Rounded Up the Best Cookware for the Task





















We Tested 8 Fine-Mesh Strainers—These Are Our Favorites





















We Tested 24 Liquid Measuring Cups to Find the Best Ones





















The Best Lightweight and Highly Packable Backpacking Cooking Gear





















We Tested 12 Flatware Sets to Find the Best Ones for Everyday Use





















We Tested 10 Salad Spinners and Found Three Favorites





















14 Cake Stands That Won’t Let You Down





















We Whisked, Scraped, and Poured to Find the Best Set of Mixing Bowls






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



