












Morgan Eisenberg - Serious Eats


























































































 







 







 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us



















Morgan Eisenberg




 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 












 





Location:
New Jersey


Expertise:
Recipe Development


Morgan is the blogger behind Host the Toast.
Experience
Morgan Eisenberg is a creative blogger at Host the Toast. She has an absolute obsession over all things edible. When she’s not coming up with crazy kitchen concoctions, she can typically be found playing Pitch with her family, diving head-first into a new hobby, or sharing a few drinks and a lot of laughs with friends.
About Serious Eats
Serious Eats, a Dotdash brand, is an award-winning food and drink website visited by over 7 million hungry readers every month. Our audience comes to us for rigorously tested recipes, science-driven cooking techniques, robust equipment reviews, and stories that offer cultural and historical context to the foods we love to eat.
Dotdash is among the largest and fastest growing publishers online, and has won over 50 awards in the last year alone, including Digiday's 2020 Publisher of the Year. Dotdash brands include Verywell, Investopedia, The Balance, The Spruce, Simply Recipes, Serious Eats, Byrdie, Brides, MyDomaine, Lifewire, TripSavvy, Liquor.com, and TreeHugger.
















Read More from Morgan Eisenberg
















Sweet and Salty Stout Marshmallow Bars With Pretzels, Potato Chips, and Chocolate Recipe





















Chorizo-Spiced Pulled Pork With Mexican Street Corn Slaw Recipe





















Fully Loaded Mexican Fried Chicken With Green Chile–Corn Waffles Recipe





















Nacho-Style Baked Potatoes Recipe





















Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet Recipe





















Oven-Baked Strawberry-Chipotle Wings





















Crispy Bulgogi-Filled Scallion Pancakes





















The Burrito Goes Global With Chicken Vindaloo





















Chicken Vindaloo Burritos Recipe





















Poutine Poppers (Cheese-Stuffed Potato Bites With Brown Gravy) Recipe





















Banh Mi Panzanella Recipe





















Bacon-Wrapped Figs With Blue Cheese and Bourbon Recipe





















Crispy Cinnamon-Sugar-Coated Cream Cheese Wontons With Nutella-Dulce de Leche Dipping Sauce Recipe





















Grilled Tarragon-Mustard Chicken Skewers Recipe





















Blue Cheese and Toasted-Pecan Dip Recipe





















Hawaiian Huli Huli Grilled Chicken Wings Recipe





















Smoky Bacon-Wrapped Baby Potatoes Recipe





















Warm Butternut Squash and Cheddar Dip Recipe





















Sheet-Pan Cuban Sandwiches Recipe





















Grilled Tandoori-Inspired Chicken Patties With Jalapeño-Mint Yogurt Sauce Recipe





















Monte Cristo Crepes Recipe





















Cajun Burgers With Spicy Rémoulade Recipe





















Korean-Inspired Crispy Tofu Tacos With Cabbage-Lime Slaw Recipe





















Pretzel Bao With Sweet Sesame-Hot Mustard Pork Recipe





















Balsamic-Strawberry Baked Goat Cheese Dip Recipe





















Slow-Cooker Chicken Cordon Bleu Dip Recipe





















Philly Cheesesteak Pierogi Recipe





















Spinach and Artichoke Dip-Filled Pierogi Recipe





















Pulled Pork Jalapeño Poppers With Raspberry Sauce Recipe





















Mozzarella-Stuffed Crispy Baked Onion Rings Recipe





















Cornbread-Coated Pulled Pork Mac and Cheese Wedges Recipe





















Updated Cheese Ball Trio Recipe





















Cranberry-Jalapeño Baked Brie Dip Recipe





















Cheesesteak Nachos Recipe





















Pulled Pork and Cornbread Make This Slow-Cooker Chili a New Favorite





















Slow-Cooker Pulled-Pork Chili With Cornbread Dumplings Recipe





















Cajun Burgers With Spicy Remoulade: A Holy (Trinity) Marriage





















Turn Your Side Dish Into a Main Event With These Spiced Skillet Potatoes





















Skillet Potatoes With Cajun Blackening Spices and Buttermilk-Herb Sauce Recipe





















Mexican Chicken and Waffles: A Mashup of Chicken, Waffles, Nachos, Tamales—Plus Bacon





















Serve up Some Savory Sweetness With Balsamic Strawberry Goat Cheese Dip





















Bacon, Bratwurst, and Beer Cheese Potato Skins Recipe





















Honey-Glazed Hasselback Butternut Squash With Parmesan Breadcrumbs Recipe





















Clams Casino Dip Recipe





















Pump up the Party With Cheesy Poutine Poppers





















Reinvent Retro This Holiday With A Trio Of Updated Cheese Balls





















Upgrade Your Potato Skins With Beer-Cooked Onions, Beer-Simmered Brats, Beer Cheese, and Bacon





















When Chorizo and Elote Meet Pulled Pork and Coleslaw: The Glory of A Mexican-Barbecue Fusion









View More




















Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



