












Grilled Beef Kebabs With Yogurt-Mint Sauce and Onion Salad Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Beef Mains





Grilled Beef





Ground Beef








Grilled Beef Kebabs With Yogurt-Mint Sauce and Onion Salad Recipe
Aromatic meat served with a bright refreshing sauce 






By

Jennifer Olvera








 

Jennifer Olvera




 


 

 


 



Jennifer Olvera is a Chicago-based food writer and cookbook author who has written eight cookbooks and contributed to Serious Eats, the Los Angeles Times, The Chicago Tribune, and others.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 19, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Jennifer Olvera

































Why It Works

Blending the kofta kebab mixture until sticky in a food processor causes the proteins in the ground beef to cross-link with each other, which keeps the kebabs from disintegrating on the grill.Chilling the formed kebabs thoroughly before grilling helps them retain their shape.


I recently embarked on an olive oil tour in Turkey and was pleasantly surprised by what I found: liquid gold rivaling its Mediterranean counterparts. I loaded my suitcase with all the bottles, spices, and Aegean sea salt I could fit.



Long after I returned home, the meals I had haunted me. They were uniformly fresh and vibrant. I can't help but think about Turkey as I turn my thoughts to spring. From silky raw sea urchin with nothing more than a squirt of lemon and turn of black pepper to crisp salads and lively seafood stews, it was an epic adventure.



In that spirit, I've made Turkish "meatballs," or kofta, reminiscent of ones at Sultanahmet Koftecisi—a storied kebab house—in Istanbul. Instead of traditional lamb, I substituted grass-fed beef, which I find just gamey enough.



Do take time to properly chill the skewered meat before grilling. Otherwise, the meatball kebabs will fall apart. Likewise, take care when turning them (and don't turn them too soon). The initial flip is the trickiest part; once they start to cook, you're golden.



Scoop them up in pita, and top them with minty yogurt sauce, onion salad, and pickled hot peppers.





This recipe was originally published as part of the column "Sunday Supper."



April 2013




Recipe Details
Grilled Beef Kebabs With Yogurt-Mint Sauce and Onion Salad Recipe




Prep
15 mins




Cook
35 mins




Active
45 mins




Chilling Time
60 mins




Total
110 mins






Serves
4
to 6 servings




Aromatic meat served with a bright refreshing sauce 


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Kebabs:


2 large white onions, divided


1 pound ground beef


3 medium cloves minced garlic (about 1 tablespoon), divided


1 large egg, lightly beaten


5 1/2 tablespoons minced flat-leaf parsley, divided


1 teaspoon ground cumin


1 1/2 tablespoons ground sumac (see note), divided


1/2 teaspoon ground allspice


1/8 teaspoon ground cinnamon


1 teaspoon dried mint


1 teaspoon ground hot pepper, such as Aleppo


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 jar pickled banana peppers


Middle Eastern chile sauce or sriracha


1 package pita


For the Yogurt Sauce:


1 1/2 cups Greek yogurt


1 medium cucumber, peeled, grated and squeezed to remove excess liquid


1 1/2 tablespoons olive oil


3 1/2 tablespoons lemon juice from about 2 lemons, divided


2 tablespoons minced fresh mint















Directions





For the Kebabs: Grate one onion using the large side of a box grater. Add grated onion, beef, 2 cloves garlic, and egg to the bowl of a food processor and pulse to combine. Add 2 1/2 tablespoons parsley, cumin, 1 tablespoon sumac, allspice, cinnamon, mint and 1 teaspoon hot pepper. Season with 1/2 teaspoon each kosher salt and black pepper. Blend until meat mixture appears sticky and smooth and all spices are evenly distributed. Place a small amount on a plate and microwave for 10 seconds. Taste and add more salt to mixture to taste.





Fill a medium bowl with warm water. Divide the meat mixture into 6 portions. Wetting your hands with water as necessary to prevent sticking, form meat into cigars about 4 inches long. Thread each kebab onto a skewer, pinching the sides and flattening the meat and as you go. (This will help meat adhere to the skewer.) Chill meat in the refrigerator, covered, for at least an hour.





For the Sauce: Combine yogurt, cucumber, remaining garlic clove, olive oil, 1 1/2 tablespoons lemon juice and fresh mint to a medium bowl. Season with salt and black pepper. Stir to combine, cover and refrigerate until ready to use.





Slice remaining onion and combine it with remaining 3 tablespoons of parsley, remaining 2 tablespoons of lemon juice and remaining 1/2 tablespoon sumac in a small bowl. Season with a generous pinch of salt. Stir to combine. Taste and adjust seasonings if needed. Cover and refrigerate until ready to use.





Light one chimney full of charcoal. When all the charcoal is lit and covered with gray ash, pour out and spread the coals evenly over half of coal grate. Set cooking grate in place, cover grill and allow to preheat for 5 minutes. Clean and oil the grilling grate.





Cover the grill and cook, turning the skewers, until the meat is cooked through, about 8 or 9 minutes, until an instant read thermometer registers 155°F (68°C). When meat is almost finished cooking, place pita on the grill, flipping after 30 seconds, until warmed through. Remove skewers and pita from the grill.





Serve meatballs immediately with warm pita, peppers, yogurt sauce and onion salad. Pass hot sauce as a condiment.




   Special Equipment  

Box grater, food processor, skewers (soaked in water for 30 minutes if wood), grill, chimney starter


   Notes  

If you can't get your hands on sumac, replace with 1 teaspoon lemon juice. Sumac is available at Middle Eastern grocery stores and online from Penzeys.


   Read More  

Kofte Kebabs With Spicy Harissa Yogurt Sauce and Grilled Flatbread
Adana Kebabs (Ground Lamb Kebabs)
Khorovats (Armenian Shish Kebabs)
How to Set Up Your Grill for Better Skewers, Kebabs, and Yakitori










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




463
Calories


16g 
Fat


51g 
Carbs


30g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4
to 6




Amount per serving


Calories
463


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 16g
20%


Saturated Fat 5g
24%


Cholesterol 84mg
28%


Sodium 916mg
40%


Total Carbohydrate 51g
18%


Dietary Fiber 5g
17%


Total Sugars 9g


Protein 30g




Vitamin C 34mg
170%


Calcium 190mg
15%


Iron 5mg
28%


Potassium 745mg
16%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Adana Kebabs (Ground Lamb Kebabs)





















Kofte Kebabs With Spicy Harissa Yogurt Sauce and Grilled Flatbread (Minced Lamb Kebabs) Recipe





















Pork Souvlaki With Pita and Tzatziki





















23 Grilled Chicken Recipes to Devour on July Fourth





















Losh Kebabs (Armenian Grilled Meat Patties)





















All-Day Meat Lasagna





















The Best Chicken Tikka Masala





















Zucchini-and-Corn Fritters With Herb Sour Cream Recipe


























Grilled Tandoori-Inspired Chicken Patties With Jalapeño-Mint Yogurt Sauce Recipe





















Tacos Árabes (Pita-Wrapped, Cumin-Marinated-Pork Tacos)





















Pinchos Morunos (Moorish Skewers)





















Khorovats (Armenian Shish Kebabs)





















Chicken Souvlaki With Tzatziki Sauce and Greek Salad Recipe





















Greek-American Lamb Gyros Recipe





















Easy Grilled Cornish Hens and Zucchini With Greek Marinade, Tzatziki, and Greek Salad Recipe





















Kafta bi Bandora (Palestinian Ground Meat Patties in Tomato Sauce)






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



