












Polenta Pasticciata (Polenta Lasagna With Mushroom Ragù) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Ingredients





Pastas





Lasagna




Polenta Pasticciata (Polenta Lasagna With Mushroom Ragù) Recipe
A casserole with layers of soft polenta, hearty mushroom sauce, and Parmesan cream.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 30, 2022



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 




A baked polenta casserole with a rich mushroom sauce and Parmesan cream. .
Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

A properly cooked, creamy polenta makes perfectly spoonable layers that soak up the mushroom sauce.Lots of Parmesan, in both grated form and in a rich cream, add an extra level of decadence.


My mind has been a bit of a mess recently. How else can I explain the fact that we're finally getting some real warm weather with beautiful spring vegetables like asparagus and peas at the market, and all I can think about are gut-busting winter dishes like polenta with ragù? As long as there's a lingering chill in the air, I'm going to milk this mental discord—I know I won't be able to get away with it much longer since no one wants to read about parsnips and rutabagas when fresh tomatoes are actually tasting good.



So what am I cooking to appease my messed-up mind? How about something just as "messed up"? Let me explain: There's an Italian dish known as polenta pasticciata, which basically means "messed-up polenta." It may not be the most appetizing name, but perhaps I can win you over with a better description. Polenta pasticciata is nothing other than a baked polenta lasagna, with layers of polenta instead of any noodles. It's very easy to make and infinitely variable, since you can use whatever fillings appeal to you, whether that's Bolognese sauce or a vegetarian mushroom ragù like the one I'm using here.



To make our polenta lasagna, we start with polenta that's actually cooked right, which means it's cooked with enough liquid for long enough that you aren't stuck picking raw cornmeal grit out of your teeth after eating it.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



We spread a layer of that good polenta in the bottom of a baking dish.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Then we top it with some grated Parmesan, for extra flavor. On top of that layer of polenta and cheese goes our filling, in this case a rich mushroom ragù that's bound with a small amount of tomato and just happens to be vegetarian. I went over the top and made a Parmesan cream by reducing heavy cream and whisking grated Parm into that, so I spooned some of that on top of the mushrooms as well. Some of you may say it seems redundant to put grated Parm and Parmesan cream inside this thing. I respond that it's a glorious mess.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Then we put another layer of polenta followed by more of the mushroom sauce, repeating with double doses of Parmesan as before.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



We top the thing with a final layer of polenta...












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



...dot it with butter, and grate even more cheese on top. Into the oven it goes, at 350°F (180°C) for about 20 minutes, just long enough to heat it through and brown the top slightly.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Before cutting into it, it's best to let your polenta pasticciata stand for 20 minutes or so, since the piping hot polenta can be really soft. Once it's firmed just a tad, you can scoop or cut pieces from the casserole more cleanly.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Of course, that's if you have your head on straight. Mine's a bit of a mess right now, so I dug in way too soon and my polenta pasticciata collapsed. It was a damn delicious mess.




May 2015




Recipe Details
Polenta Pasticciata (Polenta Lasagna With Mushroom Ragù) Recipe




Active
20 mins




Total
60 mins






Serves
6
to 8 servings




A casserole with layers of soft polenta, hearty mushroom sauce, and Parmesan cream.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 cup (8 ounces) heavy cream


3 ounces grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, divided


Double recipe smooth and creamy polenta


1 quart mushroom ragù (see notes) or ragù Bolognese


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into small pieces















Directions





Preheat oven to 350°F (180°C). In a small saucepan, heat heavy cream over medium heat until simmering. Lower heat to medium-low and cook, stirring often to prevent scorching, until cream is reduced by half, about 15 minutes. Whisk in 2 ounces grated parmesan cheese until melted. Cover and set aside.





In a medium (roughly 2-quart) baking dish, spread a thin, even layer of polenta. Top with a small amount of the remaining grated Parmesan. Spoon half of the ragù on top in an even layer and drizzle with about 2 tablespoons of Parmesan cream.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Gently spread another even layer of polenta on top of ragù, covering it completely, then top with more grated Parmesan and the rest of the ragù. Drizzle 2 more tablespoons Parmesan cream on top. Spread a final thin layer of polenta on top, dot with butter and top with more grated Parmesan.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Bake polenta lasagna until heated throughout and golden on top, about 20 minutes. Let stand until cooled slightly so that the polenta sets a little, about 20 minutes. Reheat remaining Parmesan cream, thinning with a little water if necessary, and serve polenta lasagna, spooning Parmesan cream on top.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Notes  

The exact quantity of polenta and mushroom sauce you need will depend on the size of the baking dish you use; it's possible you may have a small amount of polenta and/or mushroom sauce left over. This recipe calls for a half recipe of the mushroom ragù, but I recommend making the full batch, since it'll leave you with leftovers that you can freeze for future meals.


   Special Equipment  

Medium baking dish (about 2-quart capacity)


   Read More  

Mushroom Ragù
Creamy Polenta with Chicken, Caramelized Shallots, and Arugula
Grilled Polenta With Marinara, Parmesan, and Basil
Dinner Tonight: Polenta with Broccoli and Tomato
Seared Skirt Steak With Blistered Cherry Tomatoes and Polenta






Lasagna





Italian





Savory





Cornmeal





Mushrooms















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




635
Calories


44g 
Fat


39g 
Carbs


23g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
635


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 44g
56%


Saturated Fat 23g
114%


Cholesterol 125mg
42%


Sodium 1466mg
64%


Total Carbohydrate 39g
14%


Dietary Fiber 4g
16%


Total Sugars 5g


Protein 23g




Vitamin C 11mg
53%


Calcium 298mg
23%


Iron 3mg
16%


Potassium 566mg
12%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















12 Lasagna Recipes, From Meaty Bolognese to Vegan Variations





















Classic Lasagna Bolognese





















Classic, Savory Shepherd's Pie (With Beef and/or Lamb)





















The Best Chicken Parmesan





















29 Mushroom Recipes for Breakfast, Lunch, and Dinner





















All-American Eggplant Parmesan





















Baked Ziti With Two Mozzarellas and Parmesan Cream Sauce Recipe





















All-Day Meat Lasagna


























Introducing Lasagna Napoletana, the Meatball and Cheese-Packed Lasagna of Your Dreams | The Food Lab





















The Best Slow-Cooked Bolognese Sauce Recipe





















Summer Vegetable Lasagna With Zucchini, Squash, Eggplant, and Tomato





















The Best Spinach Lasagna Recipe





















Pasta alla Genovese (Pasta With Neapolitan Beef and Onion Ragù)





















Shrimp and Grits





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















How to Cook Italian Food Like an Italian






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



