












Homemade Pumpkin Spice Latte (With Real Squash) Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 




























 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes By Ingredients





Vegetables





Winter Squash





Butternut Squash




Pumpkin Spice Latte (With Real Squash)
A take on a classic...without missing the best part.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 24, 2023



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez

































In This Recipe


Expand





The Key to A Creamy, Frothy PSL









Why It Works

Butternut or red kuri squash add real earthy-sweet pumpkin flavor to the creamy base.The squash's natural fiber thickens the milk, helping it trap more tiny air bubbles once blended. The result is a drink that seems like the milk has been steamed the traditional way without the need for espresso gear.


For years I lived with the mistaken assumption that Starbucks' original pumpkin spice latte was made with actual pumpkin. I had never tasted the stuff, but it just seemed logical it would. So I was scandalized when a friend eventually corrected me. "You mean they call it pumpkin spice latte and there's not a drop of pumpkin?" I demanded. "Yeah," the friend said. "It's just the spice."



Apparently, I wasn't the only one this didn't sit well with, since Starbucks changed their recipe several years ago to include some pumpkin puree—number three in their "pumpkin spice sauce" ingredient list after sugar and condensed skim milk...not the ratios I personally would want to see. But by then I'd started making my own. Not often, maybe once a year, I'd simmer real pumpkin in the form of butternut or red kuri squash with milk and spices, blend it into a thickened, frothy cream, and drink that for a treat. The combination of roasty coffee with earthy-sweet squash and warm fall spices is so good, it's almost comical Starbucks managed to invent this drink and miss the best part.












Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez



About the Starbucks version, though: It's not fair for me to malign their drink without ever actually trying it, so I very recently did, and I have to cut them some slack. It's pretty tasty, and I can see why it has become so popular. It's sweeter than I would prefer, but it's not aggressively so, and the spices are dialed in to taste exactly like they should for a product like this, which is basically the edible version of the scented candle version of the edible version.



I'm not likely to become a regular drinker of either Starbucks or my own recipe—they're both a once-in-a-while kind of thing—but I think there's space in the world for both. Theirs is exactly what most of you already know it to be, mine is more like a not-too-sweet, not-too-thick pumpkin pie in a cup (with coffee). Mine also has some distinct advantages I want to point out.


   The Key to My Creamy, Frothy PSL  

One of the advantages of having never tried the real Starbucks PSL until after I'd developed my own recipe is that I was uninfluenced by any preexisting idea of what it was supposed to be. I didn't realize that Starbucks makes something that's more like a pumpkin-tinged, spiced syrup to add to a cup of milky coffee and then top with whipped cream.



So when I set out to make my own, I took a completely different path that solves a lot of technical issues while getting you much closer to a real steamed-milk, espresso-based drink. To make mine, instead of a syrup, I simmer cubes of butternut or red kuri squash (butternut squash is usually the "pumpkin" in a can of pumpkin puree) in milk with a little sweetener (either maple syrup or sugar) and the warm, autumnal spices that go into pumpkin pie recipes.












Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez



Once tender, I blend this mixture up until smooth and frothy; a high-speed blender does this best, creating the smoothest, frothiest pumpkin-spice cream, but an immersion blender works too. The beauty of it is that the fiber from the squash, once blended, lightly thickens the milk, making it seem richer and creamer. At the same time, that added fiber helps the milk trap and retain more air bubbles from the blending, giving it a frothy texture that is remarkably similar to milk that's been steamed to a dense foam—expensive espresso equipment not required.



Poured on top of a dose of coffee, which honestly can be anything from a shot of espresso to some strongly brewed coffee or even regular brewed coffee for a lighter coffee flavor, the effect says "latte" a lot more than the Starbucks version I've tasted does. It's also much easier than making a pumpkin-spice syrup, which seems to be the move many other recipes make in an attempt to create their own homemade versions of a PSL. Plus, it achieves more of the goals of this type of drink with less work.



The result? A PSL that puts the P first.




Recipe Details
Pumpkin Spice Latte (With Real Squash)




Prep
3 mins




Cook
30 mins




Total
33 mins






Serves
4
to 6 drinks




Makes
1 quart




A take on a classic...without missing the best part.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   



1 pound (454g) roughly diced, peeled butternut or red kuri squash (about half a 2-pound squash)


1 quart (946ml) whole milk


1 cinnamon stick


1 whole star anise


1 teaspoon ground ginger


6 cloves


2 cardamom pods


1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg


1/4 cup maple syrup or granulated sugar


Pinch salt


Shots of espresso or strong coffee, for serving














Directions





In a large saucepan, stir together squash, milk, cinnamon, star anise, ground ginger, cloves, cardamom, nutmeg, maple syrup (or sugar), and salt; if desired, prepare a spice sachet of cheesecloth or in a tea strainer to make removal of whole spices easier. Set over medium heat and bring to a simmer, then lower heat to maintain a bare simmer and cook, stirring and scraping frequently, until squash is very soft, abou 30 minutes.











Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez






Remove and discard whole spices. Transfer to a blender jar, or use an immersion blender to blend directly in the saucepan, and blend, starting and low speed and increasing to high speed, until squash is fully pureed and a thick, frothy liquid has formed.











Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez






For each serving of coffee, pour a shot of espresso or strong coffee (roughly 1 fluid ounce; 30ml) into a mug. Add 6 to 8 fluid ounces (175-235ml) hot spiced pumpkin cream on top and serve. Garnish with a pinch of ground spices (cinnamon, nutmeg, etc.), if desired.











Serious Eats / Amanda Suarez





   Make Ahead and Storage  

The pumpkin cream can be refrigerated for up to 5 days. Reheat in a small saucepan, frothing in a blender again if needed before serving.






Butternut Squash





The Latest





Coffee





Fall












































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















We Tested 14 Espresso Machines to Find the Best Ones, Depending on Your Needs





















Essential Baking Ingredients for Cake, Cookies, Breads, and More





















21 Sweet and Savory Pumpkin Recipes





















48 Homemade Food Gifts for the Holidays





















Which Is the Best K-Cup Coffee?





















Classic Butternut Squash Soup





















Eggnog Jello Shots Recipe





















A Classic Thanksgiving Menu to Feed a Crowd


























Mulled Wine Ice Cream Recipe





















Coffee Cabinets (Rhode Island-Style Coffee Milkshakes) Recipe





















Pumpkin Spice Ice Cream Recipe





















We Tested 20 Milk Frothers and Landed on Three Favorites





















Rich and Creamy Tiramisu





















Creamy Spiced Parsnip Soup Recipe





















We Tasted 17 Instant Coffees and Found Many That Were Genuinely Great





















Easy One-Bowl Coffee Cake Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



