












Shrimp Étouffée Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Seafood Mains





Cajun & Creole





Braised & Stewed Seafood





Shrimp








Shrimp Étouffée Recipe
Light or dark, thick or thin: shrimp étouffée the way you want it.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 23, 2023

























































(4)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Qi Ai

































In This Recipe


Expand





The Different Stages of Roux




How to Make a Flavorful Shrimp Stock




Building the Sauce for More Flavor




Use a Brine for Tender, Plump Shrimp









Why It Works

Adding less stock to start allows you to better control the consistency of the sauce later.You choose how much to brown the roux, for the flavor you want; because it calls for adding less stock upfront and then adjusting later, the recipe accommodates the diminished thickening power of a darker roux.Brining the shrimp with salt and baking soda seasons them throughout and ensures a plump and tender texture.


I'm about to smother you...with all you need to know to make shrimp étouffée.



Étouffée is the French word for "smothered," and what it really describes is a Cajun and Creole cooking method in which a protein like shrimp is cooked on the stovetop in a thick, roux-based sauce. It's a method that's also used for crawfish, chicken, you name it. At home, especially in homes not near Louisiana, shrimp étouffée is probably the most popular version, since crawfish can be hard to come by.



To make a great étouffée, it helps to first deconstruct what the dish really is in a technical sense. On the surface, it resembles a stew, and that's often how it's described. But when made with quick-cooking seafood like shrimp, it's not really a stew, in that the shrimp are not stewed for any length of time in the liquid. In fact, they're one of the last ingredients to go into the pot, and only for just long enough to cook them through.



So what is étouffée, then? I'd describe it as a velouté—a stock-based sauce thickened with a roux—with distinctly Cajun and/or Creole flavors, in which the shrimp are poached.



You may be wondering why I'm trying to dissect étouffée in this way, and my answer is: flavor. If you understand what étouffée really is, you can make a more informed decision about how to cook a truly flavorful version of it.



To put it another way, if you think of étouffée as a stew, which relies on simmering the protein long enough to extract all its flavor, you risk disappointing results, since the shrimp are cooked only briefly. But if you think of it as a sauce that needs to be complete before the shrimp ever make their appearance, you're much more likely to end up with something delicious, because you're going to build that sauce the right way: from the ground up.



To make this killer sauce, what we need is a roux—a paste of flour cooked in fat—along with a truly flavorful stock, plenty of aromatic vegetables, plus herbs and spices. By the time the shrimp enter the pot, all the work is already done.


   The Different Stages of Roux  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Roux is the French term for flour that's cooked in a fat like butter, oil, or lard, then used to thicken soups, stews, and sauces. It's a critical part of some of the most famous Cajun and Creole dishes, like gumbo and étouffée, so understanding its finer points is essential to those cuisines. (For a more thorough explanation, read my stand-alone guide to how to make roux and use it.)



Since the first step in making a roux is heating the fat, let's start with that. There is no one right fat for making a roux. Some cooks use oil, some use lard, and some use butter. I often grab butter because I love its flavor, especially in a dish featuring a delicate seafood like shrimp. That rich, toasted dairy flavor makes more sense to me with shrimp than a neutral oil does.



Whichever fat you use, once it's heated, the next step is to stir in an equal quantity of flour by volume. Together, they form a paste that you then have to cook—but just how much to cook your roux is no small decision. Much of the étouffée's final character hinges on this step.



Different people use different terminology to describe the various stages of a roux, but I'm going to use the ones that I find most intuitive.



The first stage is what I'm calling a blond roux. At this point, the raw flavor and aroma of the flour has been cooked out, but there's been little to no color development. We're still just looking at white flour mixed with golden butter. If you were making a classic béchamel sauce, also known as a white sauce, this is as far as you'd go. But down in Louisiana, there's no requirement to stop there.



Continue cooking the roux, and after a short while, it will take on a deeper tan color, verging on light brown. I'm calling this the peanut butter stage. By now, the roux has developed a toasted richness and more depth, but it's still on the mild side in terms of actual flavor.



Keep on cooking the roux, and it will descend into ever deeper shades of brown, until you get to something that resembles melted chocolate. Let's just think of that as a brown or chocolate-brown roux. It has an even deeper, more complex flavor, and an edge of bitterness.



There's no right answer for how much to cook a roux for étouffée. Ask around, and you'll meet fierce advocates of a blond roux, a peanut butter roux, a brown roux, and every shade in between. I happen to be in the peanut butter camp, since it produces an étouffée with a more complex flavor, while still retaining a bit of lightness. To me, a blond roux is too bland, while a brown one's bitter notes are too intense for shrimp. In this article, you'll see photos of étouffées made with a peanut butter roux and a brown one.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Some people find the near-constant stirring required to cook a roux on the stovetop to be a pain, and pop it in the oven instead. But making a roux in the oven takes quite a bit longer. On the stovetop, you can get to the peanut butter stage in about 10 minutes, and the brown stage in around 20 or 30 minutes. When cooking it in the oven, you often have to wait an hour or two for similar results.



Since I'm impatient and don't care to wait that long just to make a small amount of roux, I almost always do it on the stovetop. I also enjoy the sensory experience of standing over the pot and smelling the roux as it develops. You can be much more tuned into its flavor and aroma development by actively making it, instead of passively waiting for it to do its thing out of sight in the oven. Plus, it just smells damn good.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



There's one more very important thing to know about the roux before we move on: The more you toast the flour, the less effective it will be in thickening the sauce later, since toasting deactivates the starch's thickening power. (This is exactly the same thing that happens with risotto.)



This is not of small consequence, because it makes writing a foolproof étouffée recipe difficult. The degree to which you brown the roux can impact how much roux and/or liquid you need for the sauce. Not knowing this can lead to problems.



I played around with different solutions to this challenge. I considered specifying a set level of doneness for the roux, so that my recipe would work every time without fail. But where's the fun in that? A cook should be able to make the roux of their choice, not mine.



In the end, I realized that by calling for less liquid initially, and then calling for adjusting the consistency of the sauce later with more liquid as needed, I could allow the cook to control the sauce exactly as they want, regardless of the chosen shade of roux.


   For a Flavorful Shrimp Stock, Use Head-On Shrimp  

In a classic stew recipe, your first step is usually to brown the meat, after which you sauté the vegetables and add liquids like stock. Then everything gets simmered together, extracting the flavor of the meat into the liquid slowly as it cooks; by the time the meat is fork-tender, you have a full-flavored dish.



In an étouffée made with shrimp, it can't work that way. We need to build the sauce's flavor before the shrimp ever enter the pot—otherwise, they'll overcook. One huge piece of that puzzle is the stock we use.



The most obvious choice is a shrimp stock, made using the shells. That's what my recipe calls for, but there's one very important point: Shrimp stock made with shells alone, while it's an option, won't be particularly flavorful. Shrimp shells just don't bring much flavor on their own.



Using head-on shrimp for shrimp stock is worlds better, because the heads are where all the good shrimp flavor is. The only problem is that head-on shrimp can be more difficult to find, and it will be particularly challenging for folks who live in places with a more limited seafood selection. If you can't find head-on shrimp, you can still proceed with the recipe, making a shrimp stock with just the shells. It'll be better than water, certainly, but it won't be great.



An arguably better alternative is to use a good-quality chicken stock, preferably homemade. Chicken stock may sound like a strange idea in a seafood dish, but don't let that dissuade you. I've seen plenty of étouffée recipes from Louisianans that call for chicken stock, so anyone concerned about "authenticity" has nothing to worry about. But really, adding a meat stock to a seafood stew has roots even deeper than that. Bisque, after all, is traditionally made with a seafood-enhanced meat stock.



If you do make my shrimp stock, the method is very similar to the one used in most classic shellfish stocks, designed to build flavor as much as possible. I sear the heads and shells, allowing them to brown and roast in hot oil, then deglaze with an alcohol like sherry or brandy, pack the pot full of aromatic vegetables and herbs, and simmer it all for a rich, deeply shrimp-y broth.



This is one stock I don't skim the fat from, since many of the flavor and aroma molecules released by the shrimp carcasses are fat-soluble. Keep that deep-orange oil that floats on top, since it tastes great.


   Building the Sauce for More Flavor  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Roux and stock aside, the rest of the sauce relies on aromatic vegetables, herbs, and spices for maximum flavor. That starts with the "holy trinity," the aromatic base of Creole and Cajun cooking. Unlike the mirepoix of onion, carrot, and celery used in French cuisine, the holy trinity omits the carrot and replaces it with bell pepper.



That bell pepper is often green, but red can be used, too. In an étouffée, I like doing a blend of green and red: The green gives it a more grassy, vegetal flavor, while the red adds a little more fruity sweetness. Plenty of garlic and chopped scallions add even more flavor to the mix.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I cook the trinity in the roux, stirring them together until the diced vegetables are coated in the roux's paste and begin to soften. Then I add the stock, followed by a powerhouse of flavorings: bay leaves, onion and garlic powders, cayenne pepper, dried oregano, dried thyme, and hot paprika, plus salt and plenty of black pepper.



The whole pot simmers, covered, until the trinity has softened fully and is melting into the sauce. Only now is it time to add the shrimp, cooking them just until they're until firm and tender. As I mentioned above, I make sure to start off by adding the minimum amount of stock to the pot, since different doneness levels in the roux will impact its thickening ability.



There's actually one more thing that can affect the thickness of the sauce: the shrimp themselves. As they cook, the shrimp can release their juices into the sauce, thinning it slightly. This is just one more reason to hold off on adding more liquid until the end, since it's possible that a dark roux combined with juicy shrimp may mean you won't need any more liquid at all. If yours does, simply ladle in more stock until the gravy is just thick enough. For me, that's a gravy that coats a spoon, but still flows.


   Use a Brine for Tender, Plump Shrimp  

Generally speaking, bigger is better with shrimp. Certainly that's what their price per pound suggests. And in many dishes, I'd agree: Big shrimp are more of an indulgence.



In an étouffée, though, I'm less concerned with their size. If anything, they can be too big. What I prefer is a smaller shrimp that I can scoop up into my spoon along with some rice and gravy, for a big bite of everything together. Huge shrimp make that more difficult, unless you cut them up.



No matter what shrimp size you have, it's a good idea to brine them in the fridge while you make the rest of the étouffée. That involves tossing them with salt, which seasons the shrimp throughout and helps keep them plump, and also a bit of baking soda, which helps them retain a firm texture once cooked.



After all, you want to be smothered in tender, plump shrimp, not mushy ones.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik




May 2018




Recipe Details
Shrimp Étouffée Recipe




Active
2 hrs




Total
3 hrs






Serves
6
to 8 servings




Light or dark, thick or thin: shrimp étouffée the way you want it.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Shrimp Stock (see note):


2 pounds (900g) shell-on shrimp, or 3 pounds (1.4kg) head-on shrimp (small or large shrimp will work in this recipe; size doesn't matter)


2 teaspoons (8g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume


1/2 teaspoon baking soda


3 tablespoons (45ml) vegetable or canola oil


1 medium yellow onion, diced


2 large ribs celery, diced


4 medium cloves garlic, smashed


2 tablespoons (30ml) tomato paste


1/2 cup (120ml) dry sherry or brandy (optional)


1 bay leaf


A few sprigs flat-leaf parsley


4 sprigs thyme


For the Étouffée:


1/2 cup (4 ounces; 115g) unsalted butter


1/2 cup (2 1/4 ounces; 65g) all-purpose flour


1 (8-ounce; 225g) medium yellow onion


2 large ribs celery (6 ounces; 170g), diced


1 (8-ounce; 225g) large green bell pepper, stemmed, seeded, and diced (or, if you want a sweeter flavor, half of a large green bell pepper and half of a large red bell pepper)


4 medium cloves garlic, coarsely chopped


3 scallions, white and light-green parts only, thinly sliced, plus more for garnish


1/2 teaspoon dried oregano


1/2 teaspoon dried thyme


1/4 teaspoon garlic powder


1/4 teaspoon onion powder


1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper


1/8 teaspoon hot paprika (optional)


3 cups (700ml) shrimp stock, plus more as needed


2 bay leaves


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


Warm long-grain rice, for serving















Directions





For the Shrimp Stock (see note): Peel and devein shrimp, reserving the shrimp shells; if using head-on shrimp, twist off the heads and reserve with the shells. In a medium bowl, combine peeled shrimp with 2 teaspoons salt and 1/2 teaspoon baking soda and stir well. Refrigerate shrimp until it's time to add them to the étouffée.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






In a heavy-bottomed stockpot or Dutch oven, heat oil over high heat until shimmering. Add shrimp shells and heads (if using) and cook, stirring constantly and scraping up any browned bits as they form on the bottom of the pot, until it becomes difficult to remove the browned bits and it seems like they could start to burn, about 4 minutes; lower heat at any point if necessary to avoid burning.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Add onion, celery, and garlic and continue to cook, stirring and scraping, until softened. Add tomato paste and stir well until incorporated. If using sherry or brandy, add it to the pot and bring to a boil, scraping up any browned bits, then add 2 quarts (1.9L) water. (If not using sherry or brandy, just add the water right away.)











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Add bay leaf, parsley, and thyme and bring to a gentle simmer, then cook for 45 minutes. Strain stock; do not skim the oil from the surface of the stock, as the oil contains a lot of the shrimp flavor and won't be a problem for the étouffée.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






For the Étouffée: In a Dutch oven, melt butter over medium-high heat until foaming. Add flour and stir to form a smooth paste. Cook, stirring and scraping the bottom very frequently, until roux turns the color of your choice: blond, peanut butter–colored, or chocolaty brown. The color of the roux will change the flavor of the étouffée, from mild and light with a sweet shrimp flavor for a blond roux, to dark, slightly bitter, and complex for a darker brown one.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Add onion, celery, and bell pepper, then lower heat to medium and cook, stirring, until vegetables are coated in the floury paste and have softened slightly, about 4 minutes. Stir in garlic and scallion and cook for 1 minute.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Stir in dried oregano, dried thyme, garlic powder, onion powder, cayenne, and hot paprika, if using.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Add the shrimp stock in ladlefuls, stirring well to incorporate between additions. At first the stock will form a thick, gluey paste with the flour, but it will eventually thicken into a thick sauce. Bring to a simmer, then lower heat to maintain a bare simmer.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Add bay leaves, season with salt and pepper, then cover and simmer, occasionally stirring and scraping the bottom to prevent scorching, until vegetables are very soft, about 30 minutes.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Stir in shrimp and cook until they have just turned pink and are cooked through; the amount of time this takes will depend on the size of the shrimp. At this point, if the étouffée is too thick for your taste, add more stock as needed to thin it to your desired consistency.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai






Season étouffée with salt and pepper. Spoon into bowls or onto plates with warm rice. Garnish with thinly sliced scallions and serve.











Serious Eats / Qi Ai





   Special Equipment  

Dutch oven or stockpot


   Notes  

Head-on shrimp will make a more flavorful stock, so use them if you can find them. If you don't want to make the shrimp stock or don't have the time, you can substitute homemade or store-bought chicken stock. It's a totally legitimate choice—many étouffée recipes from Louisiana cooks call for chicken stock as an option.










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




390
Calories


13g 
Fat


48g 
Carbs


19g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
390


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 13g
17%


Saturated Fat 8g
38%


Cholesterol 151mg
50%


Sodium 1516mg
66%


Total Carbohydrate 48g
17%


Dietary Fiber 2g
7%


Total Sugars 3g


Protein 19g




Vitamin C 26mg
128%


Calcium 104mg
8%


Iron 3mg
16%


Potassium 419mg
9%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Cajun Gumbo With Chicken and Andouille Sausage Recipe





















How to Make a Roux and Use It Right





















Cioppino (San Francisco Seafood Stew)





















Individual Double-Crusted Chicken Pot Pies





















Lowcountry Stew Chicken





















Pancit Palabok (Filipino Noodles With Smoky Pork and Seafood Sauce) Recipe





















Shrimp and Grits





















Shrimp Scampi With Garlic, Red Pepper Flakes, and Herbs Recipe


























Squid Ink Pasta With Shrimp and Scallops





















Chinese-Style Hot Pot With Rich Broth, Shrimp Balls, and Dipping Sauces





















Gambas al Ajillo (Spanish-Style Garlic Shrimp)





















Gluten-Free Roux





















How to Cook Juicy Sous Vide Shrimp





















Cajun Shrimp





















Jamaican Pepper Shrimp Recipe





















Risotto ai Gamberi (Shrimp Risotto)






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



