












20 Savory Hanukkah Recipes to Light Up Every Night
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Hanukkah








20 Savory Hanukkah Recipes to Light Up Every Night
20 savory recipes, from festive mains like sous vide rack of lamb and whole roasted fish, to parve soups, salads, and sides.






By

The Serious Eats Team



The Serious Eats Team




 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 



At Serious Eats, we’re a team of self-proclaimed food nerds who are ever-curious about the “why” behind cooking. The staff has worked in restaurants, test kitchens, bakeries, and other notable publications, bringing extensive culinary and editorial expertise to the table.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated December 01, 2022













Trending Videos














 

J. Kenji López-Alt

































In This Article


Expand





Mains




Parve Soups, Salads, and Sides







With most holiday meals, you're pressured to go all out on a single day. Hanukkah has the benefit of lasting for eight days, which gives you over a week to eat your fill. After the crazy stress of Thanksgiving (and this year), it's nice to slow down and try a variety of dishes at a slower pace. To keep you satisfied through all eight nights of Hanukkah, we've gathered 20 savory recipes, from festive mains like sous vide rack of lamb and whole roasted fish, to parve soups, salads, and sides.


   Mains  
  Red Wine–Braised Beef Short Ribs  










Vicky Wasik



For a restaurant-quality meal at your Hanukkah table, turn to this short ribs recipe. We cook the beef low and slow in the oven to ensure juicy results. The sauce gets a boost from reduced port wine, which deepens the wine flavor while balancing out the acidity of the dry red wine. A packet of gelatin helps the sauce achieve glossy results. You're left with glazed, fork-tender meat that's perfect alongside a bed of mashed potatoes. And if you're looking for a way to speed up the process, try our pressure cooker version.



Get the recipe for Red Wine–Braised Beef Short Ribs


  Sous Vide Rack of Lamb  










J. Kenji López-Alt



Lamb is a fairly lean meat, which makes it susceptible to overcooking. Rather than risk ruining a nice rack of lamb on the stove, we recommend cooking it sous vide to guarantee that it comes out perfectly medium-rare. Don't have a sous vide circulator? You can get results that are just as good with a beer cooler and a thermometer.



Get the recipe for Sous Vide Rack of Lamb


  Slow-Roasted Boneless Leg of Lamb With Garlic, Rosemary, and Lemon  










J. Kenji López-Alt



If you've read our feature on holiday roasts, you know that we're big believers in the reverse sear. One of the most surefire ways to properly cook a big piece of meat is to roast it at a very low temperature until it's just about done and then sear it in an oven cranked up as hot as you can get it. The technique is perfect for this leg of lamb stuffed with garlic, rosemary, and lemon zest.



Get the recipe for Slow-Roasted Boneless Leg of Lamb With Garlic, Rosemary, and Lemon


  Chicken Schnitzel  










Joshua Bousel



If you're not in the mood to make lamb, our chicken schnitzel is always a crowd-pleaser, and it's pretty simple. All you have to do is pound chicken breasts, brine them for maximum juiciness, and fry them in a coating of homemade breadcrumbs. You might be tempted to deep-fry the chicken, but pan-frying is easier, and flipping the schnitzel more than once ensures even browning.



Get the recipe for Chicken Schnitzel


  Whole Roasted Fish With Oregano, Parsley, and Lemon  










Daniel Gritzer



Whole roasted fish is a Hanukkah classic that seems much more intimidating to prepare than it actually is. Pick out a fresh fish and have your fishmonger clean it for you—after that it's just a matter of brining it in salt water, stuffing the cavity with aromatics, and roasting for about 25 minutes. Take a look at our carving guide to make sure the fish ends up looking as good as it tastes.



Get the recipe for Whole Roasted Fish With Oregano, Parsley, and Lemon


  Lemon-Marinated Tuscan-Jewish Fried Chicken  










Vicky Wasik



Hailing from the Jewish community of Tuscany, this recipes offers a bright, lemony flavor to balance out the rich juiciness of typical fried chicken. A quick brine in lemon juice, along with garlic and spices, helps flavor the meat without making it tough from the lemon's acidity. Then, the chicken gets a simple coating of flour and egg before frying. It's an easy Hanukkah main that still feels bright and special.



Get the recipe for Lemon-Marinated Tuscan-Jewish Fried Chicken


  Jewish-Style Braised Brisket With Onions and Carrots  










Daniel Gritzer



No need to choose between Jewish brisket that's tender or moist—our recipe gives you both. The technique involves browning the brisket first, then slicing the meat thinly and braising it covered, making sure the meat is completely submerged in the liquid—this helps to trap moisture and reinfuse the brisket with juices. Our pressure cooker brisket offers similar results while cutting down on braising time.



Get the recipe for Jewish-Style Braised Brisket With Onions and Carrots


   Parve Soups, Salads, and Sides  
  Old-Fashioned Latkes  










Vicky Wasik



You absolutely can't celebrate Hanukkah without latkes. A perfect latke should have a plump center that tapers down to wispy edges and a deeply browned crust. This classic recipe is made with russet potatoes, onion, eggs, and matzo meal. If you're willing to break with tradition, try some of our unusual latke variations.



Get the recipe for Old-Fashioned Latkes


  The Best Applesauce  










Vicky Wasik



You're going to need some applesauce to serve with those latkes. You could go with the stuff from a jar, but perfect latkes deserve the best homemade applesauce. Cinnamon and orange peel compliment the apple flavor without getting in the way, and an optional dash of rosewater ups the sauce's floral taste.



Get the recipe for The Best Applesauce


  Roman-Jewish Fried Artichokes (Carciofi alla Giudia) Recipe  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



These crispy, golden-brown fried artichokes are a gorgeous, festive appetizer or side dish which highlights the ingenuity and cooking skill of Rome's Jews, who were confined to the city's ghetto between the 16th and 19th centuries. Serve them piping hot with lemon wedges on the side.



Get the recipe for Roman-Jewish Fried Artichokes (Carciofi alla Giudia)


  Beet and Wheat Berry Salad With Pickled Apples and Pecans  










Vicky Wasik



This vegetarian salad is hearty enough to be a whole meal thanks to the combination of chewy wheat berries, tender roasted beets, and crunchy pecans. In addition to the roasted beet root, we also sauté the leaves and stems and mix them in. Bright pickled apples keep the salad from feeling too heavy.



Get the recipe for Beet and Wheat Berry Salad With Pickled Apples and Pecans


  Make-Ahead Roasted Squash and Kale Salad With Spiced Nuts, Cranberries, and Maple Vinaigrette  










Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Another make-ahead option, this salad combines roasted butternut squash with roasted kale in a sweet maple vinaigrette. Crunchy pecans and chewy dried cranberries add some textural contrast. Feel free to eat this right after making it, but it will get even better if it sits in the fridge for a night.



Get the recipe for Make-Ahead Roasted Squash and Kale Salad With Spiced Nuts, Cranberries, and Maple Vinaigrette


  Roasted Cauliflower With Pine Nut, Raisin, and Caper Vinaigrette  










J. Kenji López-Alt



When roasting cauliflower we like to use high heat, which caramelizes the brassica and brings out its sweet, nutty flavor. It's a good idea to cut the cauliflower into thick wedges to maximize the contrast between crisp edges and tender interior. You could finish it with a drizzle of olive oil and call it a day, but for something more festive, try a vinaigrette made with pine nuts, raisins, and capers.



Get the recipe for Roasted Cauliflower With Pine Nut, Raisin, and Caper Vinaigrette


  Fried Brussels Sprouts With Shallots, Honey, and Balsamic Vinegar  










J. Kenji López-Alt



Like cauliflower, Brussels sprouts should be cooked hot and fast. A hot oven will make them wonderfully sweet and nutty, but deep-frying them is even better. The edges of the leaves get super crispy—perfect for catching a sweet-tart dressing made with honey and balsamic vinegar.



Get the recipe for Fried Brussels Sprouts With Shallots, Honey, and Balsamic Vinegar


  Beet and Citrus Salad With Pine Nut Vinaigrette  










J. Kenji López-Alt



We love the earthy flavor of roasted beets, but they take forever to cook. Wrapping the beets in foil before throwing them in the oven makes them steam and cook faster. There are tons of ways to serve beets—here we make them into a refreshing salad with grapefruit and orange segments, pine nuts, and a sherry vinaigrette.



Get the recipe for Beet and Citrus Salad With Pine Nut Vinaigrette


  Vegan Cream of Mushroom Soup With Crispy Shiitake Chips  










J. Kenji López-Alt



This mushroom soup is so creamy that you might not believe it's parve. The trick to the texture is bulking up the porcini, shiitake, and white mushroom base with white bread, which serves as an emulsifier. Be careful at the supermarket, though—a lot of shelf-stable white bread contains either milk solids or whey.



Get the recipe for Vegan Cream of Mushroom Soup With Crispy Shiitake Chips


  Easy Lentil Soup With Lemon Zest, Garlic, and Parsley  










J. Kenji López-Alt



Lentil soup can sometimes be a little boring, but this version has plenty of flavor thanks to gremolata, an Italian condiment made with lemon zest, parsley, and garlic. We sauté some of the gremolata with the vegetables and drizzle the rest on top of the finished soup.



Get the recipe for Easy Lentil Soup With Lemon Zest, Garlic, and Parsley


  Roasted Sweet Potato Soup With Pistachio, Orange, and Mint Salsa  










Vicky Wasik



The secret to this soup is a sauce similar to gremolata that we make with crushed pistachios, orange zest, scallions, mint, and olive oil. It adds brightness and tons of depth to an already-tasty sweet potato soup. The soup can be made with chicken or vegetable stock—if you go with the latter, the recipe is parve.



Get the recipe for Roasted Sweet Potato Soup With Pistachio, Orange, and Mint Salsa


  Roasted Squash and Raw Carrot Soup  










J. Kenji López-Alt



We wanted to get the most intense vegetable flavor possible for this soup, so instead of using water as the base for a roasted squash soup, we used bright raw carrot juice instead. The soup gets a simple garnish of fresh chopped parsley and crunchy toasted pumpkin seeds.



Get the recipe for Roasted Squash and Raw Carrot Soup


  Roasted Carrots With Black Sesame Dressing  










Vicky Wasik



These sweet roasted carrots are paired with black sesame paste for a nutty, earthy boost. The carrots are blanched before roasting to help them achieve more tender, sweeter results. Meanwhile, the black sesame paste needs little more than lemon juice and olive oil to transform into a dressing. Drizzle over the roasted veggies and garnish with parsley and grated lemon zest before serving.



Get the recipe for Roasted Carrots With Black Sesame Dressing













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















34 Valentine's Day Recipes for a Romantic Dinner at Home





















24 Savory Rosh Hashanah Recipes, Because It Ain't All Apples and Honey





















12 Beef Chuck Recipes That Make An Affordable Cut Shine





















13 Lentil Recipes That Will Take You Around the World





















23 Make-Ahead Thanksgiving Dishes That Travel Well





















15 Passover Dinner Recipes for a Super Seder





















Old-Fashioned Latkes Recipe





















20 Basil Recipes to Use Up Your Summer Bounty


























25 Nutty, Tasty, and Filling Recipes With Whole Grains





















31 Quick Dinner Recipes for Your Instant Pot or Pressure Cooker





















Lemon-Marinated Tuscan-Jewish Fried Chicken





















How to Prep Vegetables For Thanksgiving Day Prep





















28 Sous Vide Recipes for Perfectly Cooked Meals, Every Time





















35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















24 Zucchini Recipes For Your Summer Bounty





















9 Easter Lamb Recipes for the Holiday Table






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



