












Ricotta Gnocchi With Asparagus and Prosciutto Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Pasta Mains





Italian





Stovetop Pasta





Gnocchis





Asparagus








Ricotta Gnocchi With Asparagus and Prosciutto Recipe
Not only one of the fastest fresh pasta recipes around, but also the perfect way to showcase first-of-the-season asparagus.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 04, 2023

























































(5)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt

































Why It Works

Quick gnocchi dough comes together in less time than it takes to boil a pot of water.Using heavy cream makes a quick and easy pasta sauce with minimal ingredients and great flavor and texture.


Did you know that you can make fresh ricotta gnocchi in less time than it takes to boil a pot of water? It's absolutely the fastest fresh pasta recipe I know; with a little practice, I've gotten it down to under 10 minutes (8 minutes 53 seconds, to be precise). But the great part about this recipe is that it serves as a suitable base for a huge variety of sauces and flavors. It's one of those dishes you can pull out year-round, just changing up the toppings to suit the seasons. For instance, a friend of mine once brought over some delicious first-of-the-season fresh asparagus, which we turned into an impromptu meal on the spot.



Since then, I've tweaked the recipe a bit, adding some lemon zest to the cream sauce and fine-tuning the aromatics, but the basic premise is still a very simple one: Starting 100% from scratch, you should be able to make the gnocchi and the sauce in just about half an hour.



I start by sautéing some thinly-sliced prosciutto or pancetta in olive oil until crisp and rendered, then add some green garlic ('tis the season, though thin-sliced scallions or even shallots both taste great) and some minced garlic to the mix. As soon as they become aromatic, I add my asparagus, which I've sliced on a bias. You could peel the asparagus if you like, but it seems like overkill for such a simple dish.



Once the asparagus has just started to soften, I add a glug of heavy cream.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



As Daniel has demonstrated, cream—when reduced in a skillet—can turn into a rich, silky sauce all on its own with just a few aromatics, no need for any thickener or stock at all. At first it'll seem like the cream will just slick off of the asparagus and prosciutto, but as it cooks down it should start to coat things nicely. Once it reaches a saucy consistency, I grate in some Parmesan cheese and season it with salt and pepper to taste.



The cooked gnocchi go into the pan along with a small splash of their cooking water, a squeeze of lemon, some lemon zest, and a big bunch of chopped chives. It looks like I might have gone a bit overboard with my cream-to-pasta ratio. You will make no such error. Unless you'd like to. The Italians tend to be very particular about their sauce-to-pasta ratio.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



I tend to be very particular about not taking very particular people too seriously (but yes, I tinkered with the ratios a bit to arrive at the dish above which has just enough cream sauce to coat the gnocchi and asparagus while also leaving a tiny bit behind in the bowl for scooping up with bread at the end of the meal).












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



How's that for fast food?




May 2015




Recipe Details
Ricotta Gnocchi With Asparagus and Prosciutto Recipe




Active
20 mins




Total
20 mins






Serves
3
to 4 servings




Not only one of the fastest fresh pasta recipes around, but also the perfect way to showcase first-of-the-season asparagus.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil


4 ounces thinly-sliced prosciutto, cut into thin ribbons


1/4 cup thinly-sliced green garlic or scallions, white and pale green parts only (about 4)


2 medium cloves garlic, minced


1 pound asparagus, cut on a bias into 1 1/2-inch pieces


1 cup heavy cream


2 ounces grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, divided


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 teaspoon grated zest plus 1 tablespoon juice from 1 lemon, divided


2 tablespoons minced fresh chives


1 recipe ricotta gnocchi, prepared through the end of Step 4 (do not cook and do not make sauce)















Directions





Set a large pot of salted water over high heat. Meanwhile, heat olive oil in a large skillet or slope-sided saucepan over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add prosciutto and cook, stirring, until mostly crisp, about 2 minutes. Add scallions and garlic and cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add asparagus and cook, tossing and stirring frequently, until asparagus is just starting to turn tender, about 2 minutes.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Add heavy cream and half of Parmesan. Cook, stirring, until cream thickens and coats the asparagus pieces, about 4 minutes. Season to taste with salt and pepper.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Add gnocchi to now-boiling pot of water, stir gently, and cook until gnocchi float for 30 seconds, about 3 minutes total. Drain gnocchi, reserving 1/4 cup of pasta cooking water. Add gnocchi, lemon juice, half of lemon zest, chives, and 2 tablespoons of cooking water to saucepan with sauce and bring to a hard boil, stirring gently. Add more pasta water to thin sauce to desired consistency. Serve immediately, topped with lemon zest and additional Parmesan cheese.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt





   Special Equipment  

Large skillet or slope-sided saucepan


   Read More  

Quick and Easy Homemade Ricotta Gnocchi
Ricotta and Black Pepper Gnudi With Sage and Brown Butter
Light and Tender Potato Gnocchi With Sage-Butter Sauce










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




708
Calories


36g 
Fat


68g 
Carbs


30g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 3
to 4




Amount per serving


Calories
708


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 36g
46%


Saturated Fat 19g
95%


Cholesterol 118mg
39%


Sodium 1324mg
58%


Total Carbohydrate 68g
25%


Dietary Fiber 6g
20%


Total Sugars 5g


Protein 30g




Vitamin C 15mg
76%


Calcium 296mg
23%


Iron 4mg
24%


Potassium 693mg
15%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















Pasta ai Funghi (Creamy Pasta With Mushrooms)





















Shrimp Scampi With Garlic, Red Pepper Flakes, and Herbs Recipe





















The Ultimate Beef Stroganoff Recipe





















The Best Slow-Cooked Bolognese Sauce Recipe





















Quick and Easy Homemade Ricotta Gnocchi Recipe





















Creamy Sea Urchin (Uni) Pasta Recipe





















Creamy Orecchiette With Spring Onions, Fennel, and Bacon Recipe


























27 Quick and Easy Pasta Recipes





















18 Light and Summery Pasta Recipes





















Pasta al Limone Recipe





















Shrimp Scampi With Pasta





















Pressure Cooker Ragù Bolognese Recipe





















Penne Boscaiola (Woodsman-Style Pasta With Mushrooms and Bacon) Recipe





















Pasta Primavera (Pasta With Spring Vegetables) Recipe





















Pasta Prosciutto e Piselli (Creamy Pasta With Prosciutto Cotto and Peas) Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



