












Cocoa Butter Cookies With Chocolate Chips Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Course





Desserts





Cookies




Cocoa Butter Cookies With Chocolate Chips Recipe
An aromatic new take on an old fave. 






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated December 06, 2022
























































(6)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

Solid cocoa butter is brittle and hard, so it needs to be melted for use.Cooling to about 90°F (32°C) keeps the dough itself from getting too warm.Mellow milk chocolate, whether in the form of candy or chips, won't overwhelm the delicate aroma of cocoa butter.


Unlike those who forever chase the notion of a "perfect" chocolate chip cookie, I believe in having a recipe for every occasion. There are times when an aged dough with brown butter is worth the wait, and times when you want an old-fashioned chocolate chip cookie now.On other days, it's fun to break with tradition and play around with special ingredients, like barley malt syrup, to make chocolate chip cookies truly unique. Along those lines, I've recently fallen in love with the magic of chocolate chip cookie dough that's made by replacing half the butter with raw cocoa butter. And, as you can see, the results ain't bad.



"Raw" or "undeodorized" cocoa butter (the terms may vary by brand) was once something available only to professionals, all but impossible for the average baker to procure. Today, it's readily found in health food stores or online, from brands like Terrasoul and Wild Foods. Unlike more highly refined versions, raw cocoa butter packs an unbelievable chocolate aroma from the moment you open the bag. (Since it's solid at room temperature, it's packed in bags, like chocolate chips.)Just as a mix of butter and coconut oil will make my snickerdoodles extra soft and rich, blending butter and cocoa butter works the same way, while adding an amazing chocolate vibe, too. The main difference is that cocoa butter, as mentioned above, is rock-solid at room temperature, so it has to be melted, then cooled to about 90°F (32°C) for use.



In this recipe, plain white sugar works to keep the cocoa butter's delicate scent front and center; I found the molasses notes in brown sugar a little distracting, although I enjoyed batches made with lightly toasted sugar. A pinch of nutmeg helps coax out more aroma from traditional butter, while a generous splash of vanilla enhances the chocolaty smell.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



During the initial moments of creaming, the warm cocoa butter will make the mixture seem soupy and thin. But as the cocoa butter begins to cool, it will solidify and cream up fluffy and light. From there, the dough comes together like any other, with a whole egg beaten in, followed by all-purpose flour. The final addition is a modest amount of dark milk chocolate, which is bold enough to stand up to the dough, but mellow enough to not overwhelm the delicate cocoa aroma.



I went with Valrhona's Bahibé 46%, a favorite from my restaurant days, described as "on the edge of Dark Chocolate, in the heart of Milk Chocolate." Another option is Endangered Species 48%, which is stocked in the candy aisle at my local Kroger—it's ostensibly a snacking bar, but it's great for baking.The dough won't look super chocolate-chippy in the end, but that's the point; when you splurge on fancy cocoa butter, it should be the star of the show. To that end, I finish the cookies with a pinch of salt and a scattering of cocoa nibs, for one last layer of cocoa flavor and crunch. The nibs aren't essential, so there's no need to make a special order, but if you happen to have any on hand, they'll push these cookies over the top.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



If you're used to cocoa nibs that look and taste like sawdust, give 'em another shot with a more reputable brand, such as Valrhona or Healthworks. Whichever brand you choose, cocoa nibs should be rather chunky and crisp, with a strong bitter flavor that can cut through sweet doughs.



Bake until the cookies are puffed and firm around the very edges, though still fairly pale overall, about 15 minutes at 350°F (180°C). Due to the reduced lactose content of this recipe, the cookies won't brown much in the oven (it's the Maillard reaction, not caramelization, that's primarily responsible for browning in cookie dough). For that reason, you can't rely on typical visual cues, like "golden brown," so it's better to give them a gentle poke to make sure they've fully set around the edges.Cool the cookies directly on the parchment-lined half sheet pan. While warm, they'll be soft and chewy, but a little crisp around the edges, with a chocolate vibe that sneaks up on you over time. Their chocolate flavor won't knock you over the head like a brownie, but it's not meant to, either; instead, it'll drift over you like a light wind that smells of chocolate, relaxing and mild—the perfect cookie for when you're craving something both familiar and new.




November 2017




Recipe Details
Cocoa Butter Cookies With Chocolate Chips Recipe




Active
15 mins




Total
45 mins






Serves
28 cookies




An aromatic new take on an old fave. 


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




4 ounces raw cocoa butter (about 1/2 cup, roughly chopped; 115g), from brands such as Terrasoul or Wild Foods (see notes)


8 3/4 ounces plain or lightly toasted sugar (about 1 1/4 cups; 250g)


1 3/4 teaspoons (7g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt, plus more for sprinkling; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


1 teaspoon baking powder


1/4 teaspoon baking soda


1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg


4 ounces unsalted butter (8 tablespoons; 115g), soft but cool, about 60°F (16°C)


1 large egg, straight from the fridge


1/2 ounce vanilla extract (about 1 tablespoon; 15g)


10 1/2 ounces all-purpose flour, such as Gold Medal (about 2 1/3 cups, spooned; 300g)


6 1/2 ounces chopped milk chocolate or chocolate candies, such as M&M's (about 3/4 cup; 185g), plus more for garnishing


1 ounce cocoa nibs, from brands such as Healthworks (about 1/4 cup; 30g), plus more for garnishing (optional)















Directions





In a 1-quart stainless steel saucier, melt cocoa butter over medium-low heat, stirring frequently with a flexible spatula to speed the process along. When cocoa butter is fully melted, pour into the bowl of a stand mixer and cool to approximately 90°F (32°C). Meanwhile, adjust oven rack to middle position and preheat oven to 350°F (180°C).















When cocoa butter has cooled, add sugar, salt, baking powder, baking soda, nutmeg, and butter. Fit mixer with a paddle attachment and cream until mixture is fluffy and light, about 3 minutes. With mixer still running, add egg, followed by vanilla, and continue beating just until well combined. Pause to scrape bowl and beater with a flexible spatula, then resume mixing on low. Add flour; once combined, shut off mixer and fold in chocolate and cocoa nibs (if using).















Using a cookie scoop or scale, divide dough into 28 portions (about 2 tablespoons, 1 1/2 ounces, or 40g each). If you like, these can be transferred to a zipper-lock bag and refrigerated for up to 1 week, or frozen 3 months; soften to about 68°F (20°C) before baking.





Arrange portions on a parchment-lined half sheet pan, leaving about 2 inches between cookies to account for spread. Without flattening the portions, top each with a few extra portions of chocolate and cocoa nibs and sprinkle with a tiny pinch of kosher salt. Bake until puffed and firm around the edges, though rather pale overall, about 15 minutes. (Due to their low lactose content, these cookies will not brown as you might expect. When fully baked, they will still be quite pale but crisp around the edges.) Cool directly on baking sheet until crumb is set, about 5 minutes. Store in an airtight container up to 4 days at room temperature.














   Special Equipment  

1-quart stainless steel saucier, stand mixer, flexible spatula, 2-tablespoon cookie scoop, half sheet pans, digital thermometer


   Notes  

The aroma of cocoa butter can vary wildly from brand to brand, depending on the processing method. Look for one labeled "raw," "virgin," or "undeodorized," such as Terrasoul or Wild Foods, as more highly refined brands will have no aroma at all.






Cookies





Chocolate





Christmas Cookies















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




175
Calories


9g 
Fat


22g 
Carbs


2g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 28




Amount per serving


Calories
175


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 9g
12%


Saturated Fat 5g
27%


Cholesterol 16mg
5%


Sodium 133mg
6%


Total Carbohydrate 22g
8%


Dietary Fiber 0g
2%


Total Sugars 13g


Protein 2g




Vitamin C 0mg
0%


Calcium 20mg
2%


Iron 1mg
3%


Potassium 33mg
1%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Homemade Chipwiches Recipe





















Quick and Easy Chocolate Chip Cookies | BraveTart





















Chocolate Chip Skillet Cookie Recipe





















White Chocolate Macadamia Nut Cookies Recipe





















Tate's-Style Thin and Crispy Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Chocolate Swiss Buttercream Recipe





















Cookies 'n' Cream Cookies Recipes | BraveTart





















Malted Chocolate Chip-Pecan Cookies Recipe


























Homemade Oreo Cookies Recipe | BraveTart





















Vegan Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Hazelnut Cookies With Milk Chocolate Recipe





















Lactation Cookies Recipe





















Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Turn Leftover Easter Candy Into These Ultra-Chocolaty Cookies





















Chocolate-Covered Digestive Biscuits (McVities)





















Vegan Lactation Cookies Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



