












The Ultimate Smash Cheeseburger Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes By Course





Mains





Mains By Type





Burgers




The Ultimate Smash Cheeseburger Recipe
Same smash burger size, but twice the amount of crisp, browned crust.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated April 28, 2023
























































(32)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print













































In This Recipe


Expand





Sizing Your Patties




How Smash Burgers Are Made at the Restaurant




Smash Burgers at Home









Why It Works

Smashing ground beef firmly into an ungreased pan increases contact points, delivering maximum crust and maximum flavor.We use a stiff spatula or a bench scraper to scrape the burger up from the pan, making sure to get every last bit of tasty brown crust.By cooking two 2-ounce patties instead of one 4-ounce patty, we get double the amount of crust, while a slice of cheese in between the patties keeps things moist.


By now we all know that the old piece of burger wisdom "never press on your burger!" is either patently false or, at the very least, wildly inaccurate. Heck, there's an entire successful burger chain devoted to using the technique. While a more traditional griddled burger might be cooked with the goal of a loose, tender texture in mind, a smash burger goes for one thing only: maximum crust.












Photographs and video: J. Kenji López-Alt













See, by placing a ball of meat on a hot, unoiled griddle and smashing it down firmly into a flat, thin disk, you greatly increase the contact points between the meat and the griddle, which in turn increases the Maillard reaction. That's the series of chemical reactions that create the rich brown crust that makes our steaks and burgers taste so freaking good. Maximum crust = maximum flavor = maximum craving.



I've discussed the basic ins and outs of smash burgers in the past, but after writing that article, I found myself wondering, What if I were to take this to the extreme? Is there a way I can pack even more flavor into a burger?



Spoiler alert: The answer is a big fat (or should I say "short smashed"?) yes.


   Patty Size Matters  

I'm going to let you in on a little secret: I'm a writer by accident and a cook by design. In fact, for many years, while I was still living in Boston, I had the goal of returning to the world of restaurant kitchens by opening up my own burger joint. I even went so far as to get a partner, do market research, write up a business plan (truly the most mind-numbing experience of my life), check out spaces, design a menu and logo, and get asked in no uncertain terms* by a number of potential investors, You want that much money in this economy?!



*Insofar as it is possible to ask with no uncertainty, that is.



Needless to say, that burger joint never came to fruition, and it's probably all for the best—I can't imagine a better way to live life than to get paid to do what you love doing, all while still having weekends and holidays to be with friends and family (that's something you don't get with a restaurant life). But still, that little voice in my head was there: What if you'd done it?



I finally got the chance to live out that dream—and answer the ultra-smashed-burger questions—about a year ago, when some friends of mine who live in the neighborhood told me they were opening a new burger joint down the block. Struggling to come up with a clear menu concept, they asked if I'd help them out. You mean I get to live out my dream of opening up a burger joint and help out my neighborhood, all with no actual financial responsibility? I thought to myself. Count me in!**



** For the record, in order to avoid any conflict of interest with my work here, I have no continuing financial stake in the restaurant.













It's not that the up-and-coming area of Harlem around Lenox and 125th Street was completely lacking in burgers—Red Rooster serves a great one, and Chez Lucienne did until it closed—but what it was missing was a strong competitor in the fast-casual department. A burger that used high-quality ingredients, but was aimed at quicker dining with less fuss. A burger that was a reasonable enough size that you could eat one for lunch without feeling weighed down the rest of the day, and that didn't compromise on flavor. Thus Harlem Shake was born.***



***And, before you even ask, it was named before that song!



The question was, with so many competitors in that space, how do you differentiate yourself? Can you really do something different with a burger that's not just a novelty?



From the get-go, I knew that smashing would be part of it. The technique is not anything particularly new, and credit goes to Shake Shack for perfecting it by incorporating the use of a low-emissivity Miraclean griddle and a stiff scraper for picking up more crust than had ever been possible before. It's a fantastic technique for a fast-casual burger joint, because it not only produces great flavor but also cuts burger cooking time down significantly, meaning less waiting for the customer after they place an order.



The idea with the Harlem Shake burger was to take it one step further. Rather than a single four-ounce patty, what would happen if we split that beef in half, producing two patties of two ounces each and effectively doubling the amount of crust?



It took several months of finagling—finding the right tools for the job, hitting the right heat level, tasting various burger blends, nailing down a repeatable procedure—but in the end, it was a success. A smashing success, you might say.



Here's how it's done at the restaurant.


   How Smash Burgers Are Made at the Restaurant  
  Step 1: Place the Patties  











You start by placing two two-ounce patties on the surface of a hot (and I mean hot) griddle. These are relatively high-fat patties (around 25% fat), made with a combination of short rib, brisket, and sirloin.


  Step 2: Smash the Patties  











We tried a whole host of instruments for smashing our patties before settling on a plastering trowel, which is essentially a steel plate attached to a wooden handle. It gives you good leverage, which is important—remember, we're smashing petite two-ounce patties down to a size that's wide enough to fit on a standard burger bun.



One of the real keys here is to use an ungreased surface. You want the meat to stick, so as to maximize contact points for browning.


  Step 3: Season the Patties  











Next up, the patties get seasoned with salt and pepper. When you've got great beef, this is the only additional flavoring it needs. Think of it as a suit and tie for your patties.


  Step 4: Scrape the Patties  











After just about 30 seconds, the burgers are ready to scrape. One of the great things about the Miraclean griddle is that it heats almost completely through conduction. That is, you have to come into direct contact with it to feel its heat—you can hold your hand inches away from its surface and not feel a thing. This means that while your crust is developing, the upper portions of the patty don't cook as fast as they would on a standard griddle.



To scrape up the browned bits in the burgers, we use a heavy-duty scraper with a four-inch razor blade, pressing down on it firmly and working around the patty to make sure every last bit of flavor is lifted from that griddle.


  Step 5: Flip and Add Cheese  











After flipping the burger, a slice of American (or cheddar) cheese is added to one of the patties, and the second patty is placed directly on top. This way, the cheese gets heated from both sides simultaneously and rapidly melts, helping the patties stay together on their trip to the bun.


  Step 6: Stack and Go  











Here's the thing with ultra-smashed burgers: As with all decisions you make in life, this one comes with a tradeoff. You're never gonna achieve the true medium-rare center that you can get with a bigger, fatter burger. The patties are simply too thin. This means that yes, your burgers come out a little bit drier. But, there are ways to minimize that effect.



For one thing, the patties are cooked almost 100% unilaterally. That is, they spend most of their time with one side down, developing that massive crust. Once you flip them, you've got to work as quickly as possible—that second side should cook for no more than a few seconds.



That center layer of cheese is also of vital importance, providing fat and moisture in each bite.













From start to finish—from the time the meat gets laid down to the time the burger hits the window—the process takes less than a minute.



The basic cheeseburger at Harlem Shake comes on a Martin's potato roll toasted in butter, along with some homemade pickled cucumbers and onions and a squirt of salty-sweet special sauce made with plenty of black pepper.


   Bringing It Home  

So that's how you can do it in a restaurant space. What about at home?













The process really isn't that different; you just need a slightly different set of tools. Like the restaurant version, it starts with good beef. You can grind your own, or just buy fresh-ground beef from a good butcher or supermarket. The key is making sure it contains enough fat to get the whole thing sizzling without having to grease your pan. Fresh-ground chuck will do, and use a scale if you want to be precise (and why wouldn't you want to be?).



Unlike with regular burgers, you actually want to work this meat a little bit and help it bind together. Some gentle massaging, followed by packing it into two-ounce balls, is all it takes.













For cooking, I use either a stainless steel or a cast iron pan, with my preference leaning toward the former. A wide, straight-sided sauté pan or slope-sided skillet does the trick and cuts down a bit on the inevitable fat spatters. You want to preheat the pan over high heat for several minutes—600 to 700°F (315 to 370°C) is what you're going for here. Whatever you do, stay away from nonstick. Not only will it prevent proper crust development, it's also undesirable to heat nonstick surfaces to temperatures above 450°F (230°C) or so—the coating will vaporize.



To smash the burgers, I use my favorite Due Buoi wide spatula, plus a second spatula to apply pressure to the top.













Just like at the restaurant, the burgers should take under a minute to develop a good crust, which means that even before they hit the pan, you should have a buttered and toasted bun, complete with toppings, ready to go. And, of course, that slice of cheese.



Scraping the patties can be done with the same stiff spatula, but a sharp bench scraper does the job even better, provided you're not afraid of the pan. Don't be. I'm pretty sure hot fat can sense fear. Some heavy-duty protective gloves can help.













As soon as the patties are flipped, and I mean as soon as they're flipped, add cheese to one patty and stack the other on top. I'd recommend using either a store-bought American cheese or homemade melty cheese slices. You need a good melter to help bind the patties together.



Onto the prepared bun they go. You can mix it up with the toppings, but try to keep it simple. This is a burger that's all about the beef. I like sliced onions, dill pickles, some shredded lettuce to help catch any dripping juice (and there will be dripping juice), and a mayo-based condiment (in this case, some basic homemade mayonnaise).













And there you've got it. It's a burger that packs in a crazy amount of flavor in a single, manageable, four-ounce package. The textural contrasts you get from just the patty and cheese alone are mind-blowingly good. Juicy meat, gooey cheese, and crisp, lacy crust are just about everything I want in a burger. A burger that cooks in under a minute, no less.




March 2014




Recipe Details
The Ultimate Smash Cheeseburger Recipe




Prep
5 mins




Cook
5 mins




Active
5 mins




Total
10 mins






Serves
1 serving




Same smash burger size, but twice the amount of crisp, browned crust.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 soft hamburger roll, buttered and toasted


Condiments and toppings as desired, such as mayonnaise, mustard, shredded lettuce, onions, tomatoes, and pickles


4 ounces (110g) freshly ground beef chuck, divided into two 2-ounce (55g) balls


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 slice good melting cheese, such as American, cheddar, or homemade melting cheese















Directions





Prepare burger bun by laying toppings on bottom half of bun. Have it nearby and ready for when your burger is cooked.





Preheat a large stainless steel sauté pan or skillet over high heat for 2 minutes. Place balls of beef in pan and smash down with a stiff metal spatula, using a second spatula to add pressure. Smashed patties should be slightly wider than burger bun.















Season generously with salt and pepper and allow to cook until patties are well browned and tops are beginning to turn pale pink/gray in spots, about 45 seconds. Using a bench scraper or the back side of a stiff metal spatula, carefully scrape patties from pan, making sure to get all of the browned bits.















Flip patties and immediately place a slice of cheese over 1 patty, then stack the second directly on top. Immediately remove from pan and transfer to waiting burger bun. Serve.














   Special Equipment  

Large straight-sided stainless steel sauté pan, stiff metal spatula, metal bench scraper


   Notes  

These burgers cook very fast, so it's best to make them one at a time. If making multiple burgers, keep them warm under a tent of foil while preparing subsequent burgers.






Burgers





American





Stovetop Beef





Beef Mains





Sandwiches















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




780
Calories


41g 
Fat


55g 
Carbs


46g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 1




Amount per serving


Calories
780


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 41g
52%


Saturated Fat 18g
90%


Cholesterol 140mg
47%


Sodium 1980mg
86%


Total Carbohydrate 55g
20%


Dietary Fiber 2g
8%


Total Sugars 12g


Protein 46g




Vitamin C 1mg
7%


Calcium 1329mg
102%


Iron 6mg
35%


Potassium 689mg
15%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















We Tested 11 Grill Presses—Five Smashed the Competition





















In-N-Out vs. Five Guys vs. Shake Shack: The First Bi-Coastal Side-By-Side Taste Test





















Hot Sauce Smashed Burgers





















A Better Big Mac Recipe





















Classic Smashed Burgers Recipe





















We Tested 9 Offset Turners—These Are Our Favorites





















19 Grilled Burger Recipes to Make All Summer Long





















The Best Patty Melt Recipe


























10 Tips for Better Burgers | The Food Lab





















The Ultimate Bacon Cheeseburgers Recipe





















We Made Dozens of Crispy, Melty Sandwiches to Find the Four Best Panini Presses





















Insanity Burger From 'Jamie Oliver's Comfort Food'





















Ramen Burger Recipe





















In-N-Out Burger Secret Menu Guide





















What’s the Best Way to Grind Beef?





















The Best Imitation-Meat Burgers (Including the Impossible, and Beyond)






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



