












Har Gow (Crystal Skin Shrimp Dumplings) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Course





Snacks & Appetizers





Hors D'Oeuvres




Har Gow (Crystal Skin Shrimp Dumplings)
With plump shrimp wrapped in a thin, stretchy, translucent dough, har gow may well be the most popular dim sum classic of all.






By

Shao Z.








 

Shao Z.




 


 

 


 

 


 



Shao Zhi Zhong is a Chinese-born and Philadelphia-raised food writer and recipe developer who specializes in Chinese home cooking. She's also a web designer.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 04, 2023



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Robby Lozano

































Why It Works

Marinating the shrimp with baking soda helps keep them plump and crisp as they steam.Finely diced, par-boiled fatback adds plenty of moisture to the mix.A hot water dough made with pure wheat starch is easily malleable and forms a translucent shell when steamed.


With bright pink chunks of plump shrimp veiled in thin, stretchy, translucent dough, har gow—crystal-skinned shrimp dumplings—may well be the most popular dim sum classic of all. You might think there's a lot of difficult technique involved in getting those shrimp so plump and the skins so delicate, but it's really much easier than it seems. This particular recipe is a combination of tricks and techniques I've learned watching my parents and uncle make har gow since I was a small child.



Let's start with the filling.



The filling for har gow is usually pretty straightforward—shrimp and pork fat at its most basic, with the occasional bamboo shoot or scallion thrown in for fancier versions.












Boil the fatback to get rid of some excess salt and start rendering its fat.
Serious Eats / Shao Z.



To start, I boil pork fatback in water to remove some of the excess moisture and to soften it a bit. Fatback is great because it releases its fat slowly, keeping things moist and flavorful instead of greasy the way, say, lard or excess oil would do. I then cut the fatback into very fine pieces so that they melt into the shrimp as the dumplings steam.












Cut the shrimp into small chunks after marinating.
Serious Eats / Shao Z.



The secret to plump shrimp? A brief marinade in a baking soda solution. The higher pH helps the shrimp retain more moisture as it cooks. Check out Kenji's post on shrimp wontons for a side-by-side look at how it works.



After marinating, I cut the shrimp into small chunks, and then combine them with the fatback, as well as ginger, garlic, Shaoxing rice wine, salt, sugar, and a pinch of white pepper, along with a dash of oil and cornstarch. The cornstarch helps thicken and retain any juices that escape during the steaming process.



The trickiest part of making this dumpling is getting the right texture for the skin. Unlike siu mai (open-topped pork and shrimp dumplings) and pan fried dumplings, the skin of a har gow—made from a combination of wheat and tapioca starches—is translucent and slightly chewy.



Classic har gow dough is made with the hot water method: boiling water is poured over a bowl containing the starches, and then the mixture is kneaded. The boiling water will help prevent the dough from getting too elastic, instead allowing it to form a smooth, malleable mass with an easy-to-roll texture similar to Play-Doh.












Knead it until smooth.
Serious Eats / Shao Z.



I knead it until smooth, then roll it into a long strip to make it easy to cut into even balls. Then, I roll out each evenly sliced piece with a pin, making sure to work on a lightly floured surface.












Roll each ball of dough into a thin wrapper.
Serious Eats / Shao Z.



If you are the kind of cook who likes to take on one task at a time, make sure to keep the finished rounds of dough stacked up underneath a sheet of plastic wrap so that they don't dry out before you can stuff them.



If you're not used to pleating dumpling skins, wrapping these can be a little tricky. Check out some step-by-step instructions in this post about making gyoza. Personally, my dumpling pleating skills are pretty sad, so I usually do a simple half-moon wrap and just crimp the edges with a fork.












Serious Eats / Shao Z.



So long as your dumpling stays shut tightly enough to keep the filling and juices trapped inside, you've accomplished your goal.



Once formed, the dumplings can be frozen on a sheet tray, then placed in a zipper-lock bag for long-term storage. You can even cook them directly out of the freezer. That's why it's always nice to invite friends over for a dumpling party and get huge batches of them frozen ahead of time to feed you at moment's notice down the line.



When you're ready to cook, just place the dumplings in a parchment or cabbage-lined steamer over boiling water and a few minutes later you've got yourself one of the greatest dim sum treats around.












Ready to rest.
Serious Eats / Shao Z.



No, one batch is NOT enough.




September 2014

This recipe was cross-tested in 2023 and lightly updated with more accurate measurements and cooking times to guarantee best results.




Recipe Details
Har Gow (Crystal Skin Shrimp Dumplings)




Prep
30 mins




Cook
30 mins




Active
30 mins




Resting Time
60 mins




Total
2 hrs






Makes
20 dumplings




With plump shrimp wrapped in a thin, stretchy, translucent dough, har gow may well be the most popular dim sum classic of all.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Dough:


1/2 cup (120ml) water, boiling hot


3/4 cup wheat starch (3 1/2 ounces; 98g), see notes


6 tablespoons tapioca flour or tapioca starch (1 3/4 ounces; 50g)


1/8 teaspoon Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use half as much by volume


2 teaspoons (30ml) vegetable or canola oil, plus more for rolling dough


For the Shrimp Filling:


1/2 pound (227g) shrimp, shelled and deveined


1 teaspoon baking soda


One 2- by 3-inch piece pork fatback (about 2 ounces)


1 (5ml) teaspoon vegetable or canola oil


1 teaspoon cornstarch


3/4 teaspoon Shaoxing wine


1/2 teaspoon minced ginger


1/2 teaspoon minced garlic


1/2 teaspoon Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use half as much by volume


1/2 teaspoon granulated sugar


1/4 teaspoon ground white pepper


Black vinegar, for serving















Directions





For the Dough: In a medium bowl, whisk together wheat starch, tapioca flour/starch, and salt. Add oil and boiling water. With a silicone spatula, mix until a shaggy dough is formed, 1 to 2 minutes. Turn dough out onto a table and knead until a smooth ball forms, about 1 minute. Wrap dough tightly in plastic wrap and set aside at room temperature.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






For the Filling:Fill a small pot halfway with water and bring to a boil over high heat. Add fatback and boil for 10 minutes. Drain well and transfer fatback to a paper-towel lined plate and let cool slightly, about 10 minutes.When the fatback is cool to the touch, remove and discard the skin (if the skin is attached) and mince and reserve the fat.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, cover shrimp with cold water (about 1 1/2 cups) and stir in baking soda. Refrigerate 30 minutes.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






Drain and rinse shrimp under cold running water, then pat dry with paper towels. Chop shrimp into 1/4- to 1/2- inch pieces and place in a medium bowl. Add minced fatback, oil, cornstarch, Shaoxing wine, ginger, garlic, salt, sugar, and ground white pepper. Mix well and refrigerate covered for at least 30 minutes or up to 1 hour.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






To Assemble: Cut the dough in half. Rewrap half of the dough in plastic wrap to prevent drying; set aside. Roll the other dough half into a 12-inch long rope. Cut the rope into 12 equal sized portions, about 1/4 ounce (7g) each. Lightly oil your hands, rolling pin, and work surface. Working with 1 cut dough piece at a time (keep remaining dough pieces covered with plastic wrap), roll dough into a circle about 3 1/4- to 3 1/2-inches in diameter. Repeat with the remaining cut dough portions and the other half of the dough, applying more oil to your hands, rolling pin, and work surface as needed. Lay the finished wrappers side-by-side on a baking sheet and cover loosely with plastic wrap while shaping remaining wrappers.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






Working with 1 wrapper at a time, place 2 teaspoons of shrimp filling in center of wrapper. Fold the wrapper in half over the filling, and pinch to seal one of the bottom corners (it can be on the left or right, depending on what feels most natural to you). Holding the dumpling in your non-dominant hand, use your thumb and forefinger on the dominant hand to create pleats, one at a time, next to the sealed corner, pleating until you’ve reached the other end. Press along the top to reinforce pleating and ensure it is well sealed. Transfer shaped har gow to a parchment-lined sheet tray. Repeat with remaining wrappers and filling.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano






To steam, bring 4 cups water to a boil in a flat-bottomed wok or 12-inch skillet. Lightly grease two parchment rounds that measure about 1-inch less in diameter than your steamer baskets. Place parchment rounds in two bamboo steamer baskets. (Alternatively, line bottom of steamer baskets with cabbage leaves). Arrange dumplings on prepared parchment so that they are not touching; stack baskets and cover. Adjust heat as needed to maintain simmer and set steamer in wok or skillet. Steam until har gow wrappers are translucent, about 7 minutes, or 9 minutes if steaming dumplings from frozen. Off heat, remove steamer from wok and let rest, covered, for 1 minute. Serve warm with black vinegar.











Serious Eats / Robby Lozano





   Special Equipment  

Rolling pin, steamer


   Notes  

Wheat starch is available at Asian grocery stores and can also be ordered online.



Pleating dumplings can be a little tricky (see this post for instructions on folding purse-shaped dumplings).



While this recipe is written for 2 steamer baskets to save in time, it will also work with one steamer basket.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

To freeze the dumplings, place the dumplings in a single layer and not touching on a sheet tray or a large plate lined with wax paper. Freeze until frozen, about 1 hour, then transfer har gow to a zip-lock bag or sealed container. Steam the dumplings straight from the freezer following directions in step 7.


   Read More  

Chinese Fried Pork and Cabbage Dumplings With Homemade Wrappers (guo tie)
Homemade Wonton Soup
The Best Japanese Pork and Cabbage Dumplings (Gyoza)
Pork and Shrimp Siu Mai (Steamed Chinese Dumplings)
How to Throw a Dim Sum Party at Home
A Dim Sum-Inspired Chinese Food Party






Hors D'Oeuvres





Chinese





Stovetop





Shrimp





Christmas Appetizers















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




1428
Calories


56g 
Fat


171g 
Carbs


54g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts






Amount per serving


Calories
1428


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 56g
71%


Saturated Fat 15g
77%


Cholesterol 330mg
110%


Sodium 3365mg
146%


Total Carbohydrate 171g
62%


Dietary Fiber 6g
21%


Total Sugars 4g


Protein 54g




Vitamin C 1mg
3%


Calcium 179mg
14%


Iron 9mg
47%


Potassium 519mg
11%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Beyond Potstickers: Around the World in Dumplings





















The Best Gyoza (Japanese Pork and Cabbage Dumplings) Recipe





















How to Make Pork and Shrimp Siu Mai, a Classic Chinese Dim Sum Dumpling





















Kid-Friendly Dumpling Recipe | The Food Lab Junior





















17 Recipes for a Homemade Dumpling Feast





















Pork and Shrimp Siu Mai (Steamed Chinese Dumplings) Recipe





















Sheng Jian Bao (Pan-Fried Pork Soup Dumplings) Recipe





















Guo Tie (Chinese Fried Pork and Cabbage Dumplings with Homemade Wrappers)


























Lo Mai Gai (Chinese Sticky Rice Wrapped in Lotus Leaf) Recipe





















The Serious Eats Guide to Dim Sum





















The Serious Eats Guide to Shopping for Asian Noodles





















Pork and Chives Dumpling Recipe





















The Best Dumplings in Los Angeles





















Soup Dumplings (Xiao Long Bao) Recipe





















18 Winning Recipes for Shrimp Lovers





















Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



