












Pumpkin Skillet Coffee Cake With Streusel Topping Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Quick Breads





Pumpkin





Breakfast & Brunch





Cakes





Fall Breakfast & Brunch








Pumpkin Skillet Coffee Cake With Streusel Topping Recipe
All the color and flavor of pumpkin pie, crossed with the richness of a blondie, the heartiness of a muffin, and the crispy streusel topping of a coffee cake.






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 03, 2022

























































(12)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































In This Recipe


Expand





Making the Streusel Topping




Making the Pumpkin Batter




Baking the Pumpkin Coffee Cake









Why It Works

A generously spiced and salted streusel provides flavor and crunch to the coffee cake.Ground or grated white chocolate gives the batter a moist and rich crumb.Malted milk powder deepens the earthiness of pumpkin and improves browning overall.


Let me be clear about this up front: I have no idea what I've created here. As with my brown butter ricotta cookies, this is a culinary mistake that nearly wound up in the trash heap for falling so short of my aspirations. But ultimately, I discovered the only mistake was my unwillingness to accept this new creation on its own tender, chewy, cakey, pumpkin-spiced terms.



I'd originally set out to make a pumpkin blondie, based on the ultra fudgy white chocolate blondies in my cookbook. I wanted something that had a glossy crust, a gooey interior, and chewy edges, but with the flavor of pumpkin pie. What I got instead was something like pumpkin streusel muffins crossed with a coffee cake.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



While a complete and total failure in the realm of fudginess, it managed to combine the best elements of those individual treats, baking up richer than a muffin, chewier than a coffee cake, and lighter than a blondie, with a hint of malt plus an autumnal aroma to rival pumpkin pie.



It's not a pumpkin cake. It's not a pumpkin muffin. It's not a pumpkin blondie. It's just a pumpkin...thing, and while I'm okay with that, calling it a "coffee cake" is the least confusing option available, because that at least helps convey its heartiness and density, if not its alluring richness and chew.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Another winning feature is its size, as the 10-inch cast iron skillet format yields the perfect amount for sharing with friends and family over brunch or afternoon tea (it bakes up much smaller than a 9- by 13-inch sheet cake, but it's much larger than a basic 8-inch round).


   Making the Streusel Topping  

The first step in this recipe is preparing the salty-sweet and spicy oatmeal streusel.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It's a buttery blend of rolled oats, flour (whether whole wheat or APF), brown sugar, loads of salt, and a host of autumnal spices, with raw pecans that will toast to a crisp in the oven and chunks of white chocolate that caramelize as they bake.



A stand mixer fitted with a paddle attachment will blend the dry ingredients into the soft butter without any fuss; in fact, if you're making the entire recipe all in one go, that's probably the easiest option.



But streusel is something I rarely make and use right away. Rather I'm in the habit of keeping a few bags in the freezer, so I always have a batch on hand for sprinkling over cakes, and pies, and cookies, and my life in general*. On those occasions, it's easier for me to whip the streusel up by hand than fuss with a stand mixer if I'm not using it for anything else.



*Perpetual access to ready-made streusel is, in fact, how this recipe evolved—a spur-of the-moment layer of crunch tossed over the pumpkin "blondie" batter on a whim.



However you make it, the process is stupid simple. Smush the butter into the dry ingredients, then add the white chocolate and pecans. Just remember that smush is the operative word; the blades of a food processor will only grind the oats into the butter, making for a sad, mealy streusel.



Once everything is smushed together, the streusel can be refrigerated while the pumpkin thing is underway, or frozen in an airtight container for several months (no need to thaw before use).


   Making the Pumpkin Batter  

The first step in making the pumpkin batter is combining the white chocolate with flour and malted milk powder (a.k.a. the umami bomb of dessert). This can be done by grating the white chocolate like Parmesan with a Microplane, then whisking it with the flour and malted milk powder, or by grinding everything together in a food processor. The latter is by far the fastest method, but the former is perfect for those without a food processor (or those who simply hate busting it out).



In either case, by reducing the white chocolate to a fine powder, cocoa butter and dairy solids will be distributed throughout the batter. This improves both richness and browning down the road. The malted milk powder plays a similar role, furnishing the batter with both maltose and powdered milk for a boost to flavor and complexity, as well as browning. Since it's not playing a structural role, feel free to omit the malted milk powder if it's not something you keep in stock, but it's an easy buy from most any supermarket, where brands like Carnation and Ovaltine (plain) are stocked right next to the hot cocoa mix. Otherwise, you can always pick up a big carton online from brands like Hoosier Hill Farms.



Like the streusel, this dry mix can be prepared in advance to split the recipe up into smaller, more manageable chunks; since it contains nothing but pantry staples, it can be stored in an airtight container at room temperature up until the earliest date stamped on its constituent parts. (For example, if the malted milk powder expires before the flour, it's the malted milk powder's shelf life that will determine how long the mix will be usable.)



With the dry mix and streusel prepared in advance, whether by a few moments or a few weeks, the pumpkin skillet thing itself comes together pretty fast. It starts with the classic creaming method that you'd see for any cookie, with the butter and sugar (plus spices, leavening, and vanilla) beaten together until creamy, soft, and light.



After I add an egg, the recipe veers into cake territory with the addition of liquid in the form of pumpkin purée (whether canned or homemade or "faked" with roasted butternut squash purée, my favorite hack for pumpkin pie), along with the malted white chocolate flour.



After scraping and folding the batter with a flexible spatula to ensure it's totally uniform throughout, I transfer it to a lightly buttered cast iron skillet.


   Baking the Pumpkin Coffee Cake  

The mixture turns out thicker than a cake batter but softer than cookie dough, so you will need to spread it out in an even layer. Once level, it's topped with the prepared streusel, and baked at 350°F (180°C) until puffed and somewhat firm in the center, with the pecans and white chocolate visibly toasted; for me that takes about 35 minutes, with a few minutes less or more serving to push it closer to fudginess or cakiness, respectively.



Because the timing can vary depending on the exact shape and gauge of the cast iron skillet, it can be useful to check the internal temperature as a cross reference. The "cake" should hit approximately 205°F (96°C) in the very center when a digital thermometer probe is inserted at a 45° angle and kept about 1/4 inch above the bottom of the skillet.



Thanks to all the melted cocoa butter in the batter, the interior will be quite molten while piping hot—wet, gooey, and seemingly underdone—so resist the temptation to dig in right away. But as it cools to room temperature, it will develop a texture that's much cakier and lighter.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Whether passed off as a coffee cake at brunch, or served with coffee as an afternoon treat, it's a fun fall recipe that offers up all the flavors and aromas of the season in a cozy, cast iron package.




October 2018




Recipe Details
Pumpkin Skillet Coffee Cake With Streusel Topping Recipe




Active
60 mins




Total
3 hrs 30 mins






Serves
14 servings




All the color and flavor of pumpkin pie, crossed with the richness of a blondie, the heartiness of a muffin, and the crispy streusel topping of a coffee cake.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Streusel Topping:


1 1/2 ounces old-fashioned rolled oats, not quick cooking or instant (about 1/3 cup; 45g)


1/2 ounce all-purpose or whole wheat flour (about 1 shy tablespoon; 14g)


1/2 ounce light brown sugar (about 1 tablespoon; 14g)


1 1/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon


1/2 teaspoon (2g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


1/4 teaspoon ground ginger


1/4 teaspoon grated nutmeg


1/8 teaspoon ground cloves


1 ounce unsalted butter, softened to about 70°F/21°C (2 tablespoons; 30g)


2 ounces white chocolate, such as Green & Blacks (about 1/3 cup; 55g), chopped into 1/4-inch pieces


4 ounces raw pecan pieces (about 2/3 cup; 110g)


For the Pumpkin Skillet Batter:


9 ounces all-purpose flour, such as Gold Medal (about 2 cups, spooned; 255g)


4 ounces white chocolate, such as Green & Blacks (about 2/3 cup finely chopped; 110g)


1 1/2 ounces malted milk powder, such as Carnation or Hoosier Hill Farms, (about 3 tablespoons; 45g)


10 ounces light brown sugar (about 1 1/4 cups, gently packed; 280g)


5 ounces unsalted butter, pliable but cool, about 60°F/16°C (about 10 tablespoons; 140g)


1 1/2 teaspoons (6g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


1 teaspoon baking powder


1/8 teaspoon grated nutmeg


1/2 ounce vanilla extract (about 1 tablespoon; 15g)


1 large egg, straight from the fridge (about 1 3/4 ounces; 50g)


4 ounces pumpkin or butternut squash purée, canned or homemade (about 1/2 cup; 110g)















Directions





For the Streusel Topping: In a medium bowl (or the bowl of a stand mixer), combine rolled oats, flour, brown sugar, cinnamon, salt, ginger, nutmeg, cloves, and softened butter. Combine by hand (or with a paddle attachment) to smash the butter into the dry ingredients, until everything is coated and clumpy. Add white chocolate and pecans and continue smashing (or mixing) to form a clumpy mix. Cover and refrigerate until needed, or transfer to a zip-top bag and freeze for up to 3 months.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






For the Pumpkin Skillet Batter: In the bowl of a food processor, grind flour, white chocolate, and malted milk powder to form a fine, dry mix with no visible lumps of white chocolate. Alternatively, grate white chocolate with a Microplane, then whisk with flour and malted milk powder to combine. Set aside until needed, or transfer to an airtight container and store at cool room temperature until the date stamped on the bag of flour.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Adjust oven rack to middle position and preheat to 350°F (180°C). In the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with a paddle attachment, combine brown sugar, butter, salt, baking powder, nutmeg, and vanilla. Mix on low to moisten, then increase speed to medium and beat until very soft, pale, and fluffy, about 8 minutes. Along the way, pause to scrape bowl and beater with a flexible spatula as needed.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






While mixing on medium speed, add egg and continue beating until smooth. Reduce speed to low, and add pumpkin purée. Once smooth, add the malted white chocolate-flour all at once, and continue mixing to form a thick batter. Scrape bowl and beater with a flexible spatula, then fold once or twice to ensure it's well mixed from the bottom up.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Scrape batter into a lightly greased cast iron skillet (the leftover butter wrappers should do the trick), and spread into an even layer. Scatter prepared streusel topping over the top in an even layer, and bake until the "cake" is puffed, golden brown, and approximately 205°F (96°FC) in the center, about 35 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Cool to room temperature before serving, as the "cake" will seem gooey and wet while warm due to the molten cocoa butter in the white chocolate. When cool, cut into wedges with a sharp knife, and serve alongside a strong cup of coffee or tea for brunch or dessert. Individually wrapped in plastic, the portions will keep at room temperature for several days.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Food processor or microplane, stand mixer, 10-inch cast iron skillet, digital thermometer


   Notes  

For a cakier crumb, reduce the light brown sugar to 9 ounces (about 1 rounded cup, firmly packed; 255g).


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

The prepared streusel can be frozen for up to three months. The prepared malted white chocolate flour can be stored at cool room temperature until the date stamped on the malted milk powder.



After serving, individually wrapped slices of coffee cake will keep for several days at room temperature.










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




392
Calories


20g 
Fat


49g 
Carbs


5g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 14




Amount per serving


Calories
392


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 20g
26%


Saturated Fat 9g
46%


Cholesterol 42mg
14%


Sodium 286mg
12%


Total Carbohydrate 49g
18%


Dietary Fiber 2g
8%


Total Sugars 30g


Protein 5g




Vitamin C 1mg
3%


Calcium 82mg
6%


Iron 2mg
10%


Potassium 174mg
4%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















23 Easy Cake Recipes That'll Make Every Day a Cake Day





















Upside-Down Blueberry Muffin Recipe





















Texas Sheet Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Chip Skillet Cookie Recipe





















Thick and Fluffy Pancakes From Homemade Pancake Mix Recipe





















Chocolate Cherry Layer Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















Light and Thin Pancakes From Homemade Pancake Mix Recipe


























Homemade Chipwiches Recipe





















Microwave Rocky Road Sponge Cakes Recipe





















Easy One-Bowl Coffee Cake Recipe





















9 Dessert Recipes Starring Malted Milk Powder





















Essential Baking Ingredients for Cake, Cookies, Breads, and More





















Bibingka (Filipino Rice Cake)





















Old-Fashioned Jelly Roll





















13 Easy Cast Iron Skillet Dessert Recipes






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



