












Spaghetti With Carbonara Sauce Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes by World Cuisine





Europe





Southern European





Italian




Spaghetti With Carbonara Sauce Recipe
Foolproof silky, guanciale- and cheese-sauced spaghetti carbonara.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated September 15, 2022
























































(22)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print













































In This Recipe


Expand





Choosing Your Ingredients




Cooking Pasta Carbonara the Right Way









Why It Works

A sauce of mostly yolks has a richer, silkier, tighter texture than one made with only whole eggs.A mixture of Pecorino Romano and Parmigiano-Reggiano delivers that essential Roman flavor without making the pasta taste excessively salty or sharp.Using a large mixing bowl and setting it over the boiling pasta water to create a makeshift double boiler helps prevent you from accidentally scrambling the eggs.


Of all the theories of how carbonara sauce came to be—and there are a lot—the most probable is that it's just an old Roman dish using the kinds of ingredients that have been kicking around the Italian countryside for centuries. Add to that plenty of freshly cracked black pepper, a spice so deeply woven into Roman history that it was twice extracted as ransom by invaders, and you have the building blocks of the famed sauce.












Carbonara sauce is quick, easy, and requires just a little finesse. .
Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



But even if you subscribe to one of the other, more spurious origin stories, you have to admit it's a rare and remarkable recipe that includes ingredients—eggs, cured pork, and cow's- and sheep's-milk cheeses—from all four of the major farm animals, as defined by the Major Farm Animal Index. (The 1973 version, not the one from '94, which anyone in their right mind would agree was a hot mess—alpacas at number five? Gimme a break.)



While it's fundamentally a simple dish, the challenge of carbonara is cooking the sauce just enough to form a thick, silky coating on the pasta without accidentally scrambling the eggs. I'll get to how to do that in just a second, but first I want to go over a few smaller decisions you'll have to make before starting—namely, choosing your cut of pork, deciding whether to use whole eggs versus just yolks, and picking your cheeses.


   Choosing Ingredients for Your Carbonara  
  First, Pick Your Pork  

One of carbonara's origin stories says that it was created to appeal to bacon- and egg-eating American G.I.s stationed in Italy after World War II. But, as David Downie's great Roman cookbook, Cooking the Roman Way (at Amazon), explains, the dish existed under one name or another long before that. (As for the name itself, the tale that carbonara was named after soot-covered coal miners is equally difficult to prove.)



That means that on carbonara's pork authenticity scale, smoked American bacon is down near the bottom. Pancetta, Italian cured (but not smoked) pork belly, is much higher up. At the top is guanciale, cured pork jowl.



But knowing what's most authentic only gets us so far. What about flavor? I prepared three versions of carbonara, using each of those three ingredients. All proved themselves to be worthy options, though there were differences.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Guanciale, as you can see in the photo above, tends to have the highest ratio of fat to lean meat, which means that it renders the most liquid fat as it cooks, creating a more unctuous sauce. It's also often cured with a more generous amount of warm spices rubbed onto its surface; sometimes it's made with black pepper alone, but the guanciale I used in my tests also had a stronger flavor of clove and cinnamon. Those spice flavors come through in the finished dish.



Pancetta, meanwhile, delivered the purest porky flavor, which most of my tasters seemed to prefer. American bacon, as you can imagine, added a hint of smoke, which is pretty darned tasty in its own right and definitely worth considering. It's also an undisputed natural partner for eggs, even if that's not how carbonara came to be. If smoked bacon is all you can get, there's no reason to let authenticity stand between you and a filling bowl of carbonara.



No matter which type of cured pork you end up using, it always helps to chill it well before attempting to dice it, since fatty pork can be frustratingly squirmy at room temperature.


  Second, Get in on the Yolk  

One of the biggest differences you'll notice when reviewing carbonara recipes from around the world is that some call for whole eggs and some just the yolks. When I started working on this recipe, I was expecting to just call for whole eggs, since it's annoying to have to decide what to do with leftover whites. We have some suggestions here, but let's be honest: Wouldn't it be better to not have to deal with that?



Welp, sorry to say it, but after side-by-side tests, I've become a yolk evangelist. If you use my recipe (and you should!), you'll have leftover egg whites to look forward to.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



In my test, I made a single portion of carbonara using 100 grams of dried pasta (my go-to amount for one person) and a single whole egg. I measured that egg by mass and made a second batch at the same time, using the exact same amount of yolk. Take a look at the photo above, because it speaks for itself. The yolk made a tight, rich sauce that coated the spaghetti beautifully, though some tasters found it a little too rich. The whole egg thickened into a nice sauce, but was more watery (remember, I used exactly the same mass of whole egg and yolk, so it's not because there was less egg in the yolk-only batch), and there was really no easy way to tighten it up without scrambling the eggs.



My final recipe, which serves four, calls for mostly yolks, with just a couple of whole eggs tossed in. The result is a sauce with an absolutely perfect texture, just thick and rich enough.


  Third, Choose the Cheese  

Last up are the cheeses. This is a Roman pasta dish, so, to me, it just won't taste right without the salty tang of Pecorino Romano, an aged sheep's-milk cheese. But Pecorino Romano alone has an assertive flavor, which is why I and many others like to cut it with the sweeter, fruitier flavor of Parmigiano-Reggiano. I use equal parts of each and whisk them into the eggs and yolks in a mixing bowl, along with plenty of coarsely ground black pepper.



Okay, now it's time to actually cook the dish.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik


   Cooking Pasta Carbonara the Right Way  

Let's quickly review the way we finish most pastas: First, we cook the pasta in salted water (but don't make it too salty), using only as much water as we need to submerge the pasta. The less water we use relative to the pasta, the starchier the water will be, which will help bind and thicken the final sauce.



Meanwhile, as the pasta cooks, we heat our sauce in a separate pan. When the pasta is al dente, we transfer it to the sauce, add some of the pasta water, and finish cooking them together until the sauce has thickened just enough to coat the pasta. If it reduces too much, or if the pasta is still a hair underdone, we can keep adding more water, bit by bit, until the sauce is just the right consistency and the pasta is at its absolute perfect point of doneness. Then we stir in some grated cheese and serve.



With carbonara, though, that universal pasta-cooking method won't work. (Incidentally, it also doesn't work with pesto, which tastes best if the sauce isn't cooked.) The eggs in the sauce make it impossible to simmer the pasta with the sauce for any length of time, lest they scramble.



What that means is that we have to combine the cooked pasta with the egg-and-cheese mixture and cook it without too much fiddling, so that the eggs thicken just enough but don't overcook.



I've met some folks who swear that you can just toss it all together off the heat and serve it, but I've never been able to make that work. The eggs have to cook just enough to reach a light custardy consistency, and we need some extra heat to do that...just not too much.



There are two ways to go about it. The quickest is in a skillet on the heat. The safest is a trick I came up with while developing this recipe. Here are both of them.


  Higher Risk: The Skillet Method  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Let's start with the slightly faster but also higher-risk method: finishing the pasta in a skillet over direct heat. While the pasta is cooking, I crisp the pork in a skillet with a little olive oil. Then I whisk the eggs with the cheese and pepper in a large mixing bowl.



When the pasta is ready, I drop it into the skillet with the pork and stir it around so it picks up the fat and crispy bits. Then I scrape all of that into the mixing bowl with the egg-and-cheese mixture and add some of the pasta water. I give it all a good stir so that the pasta is well coated, then transfer it all back into the skillet.



I set that over medium heat and cook, stirring constantly with tongs. The key here is to use the pasta almost like a mop, so that none of the sauce is left in contact with the hot pan's surface for too long. That mop-like effect is easiest with a long noodle like spaghetti, which is my top choice for carbonara, but you can make it work even with short pasta like penne, another popular carbonara option.



You'll know it's ready when the sauce tightens up, coats the noodles, and leaves clear trails behind as you stir it. To help regulate the heat, you should feel free to lift the skillet on and off the heat as needed until you reach that point of perfection. As soon as the sauce reaches the right consistency, transfer the pasta to a warm serving bowl. Like scrambled eggs, carbonara can easily overcook through the residual heat in the skillet.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik


  Lower Risk: The Double-Boiler Hack  

It occurred to me while I was working on this that I had everything I needed to set up a makeshift double boiler: a pot of boiling water and a large mixing bowl that I can nest on top. As anyone who's ever made an egg-based sauce like hollandaise or crème anglaise knows, one of the best ways to ensure that you don't scramble the egg is to cook it in a double boiler, as the steam heat on the bottom of the top chamber is gentler than a direct flame under a pan. Since carbonara is essentially a savory custard sauce, it's a trick that works just as well here. This is now my preferred method, and the one I'm giving in this recipe. The key is to not drain the pasta pot, since you'll use the boiling water to heat the mixing bowl.



To do it, cook the pasta and pork as usual, and mix the eggs and cheese in a large mixing bowl, just as described above. Make sure to choose a mixing bowl that will nest well over the pasta pot without the bottom touching the water. Then, using tongs and/or a strainer, transfer the pasta to the skillet with the pork and scrape it all together into the big mixing bowl with the egg-and-cheese mixture. Once again, add some of that pasta water and give it all a good toss.



Then nest the mixing bowl on top of the still-simmering pasta pot and stir constantly until the sauce thickens up. You still need to stir constantly, because the egg will eventually scramble even in a double boiler, but this setup gives you some insurance against it happening so rapidly that you don't even realize it before it's too late.



As soon as it's ready, transfer it to bowls and serve. Then eat it right away: This is not a dish that gets better as it sits.




December 2015




Recipe Details
Spaghetti With Carbonara Sauce Recipe




Cook
30 mins




Active
20 mins




Total
30 mins






Serves
4 servings




Foolproof silky, guanciale- and cheese-sauced spaghetti carbonara.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




Kosher salt (see notes)


1 pound (450g) dried spaghetti (see notes)


1/2 cup diced guanciale, pancetta, or bacon (about 3 ounces; 85g) (see notes)


3 tablespoons (45ml) extra-virgin olive oil, divided


2 whole large eggs plus 6 yolks


1/4 cup grated Pecorino Romano (about 1 ounce; 25g), plus more for serving


1/4 cup grated Parmigiano-Reggiano (about 1 ounce; 25g), plus more for serving


1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper (ground medium-coarse), plus more for serving















Directions





Bring a pot of salted water to a boil. Add pasta and cook, stirring, until al dente.





Meanwhile, combine guanciale (or pancetta or bacon) with 2 tablespoons (30ml) olive oil in a large skillet and cook, stirring frequently, over medium heat, until fat has rendered and guanciale is crisp, about 7 minutes.











Vicky Wasik






In a large, metal heatproof mixing bowl, whisk together whole eggs and yolks, Pecorino Romano, Parmigiano-Reggiano, and black pepper.











Vicky Wasik






Using tongs and/or a strainer, transfer pasta to skillet with crisped guanciale and its fat; be sure not to drain boiling pasta water. Add remaining 1 tablespoon (15ml) olive oil to pasta and stir to combine; let cool slightly. Scrape pasta, pork, and all the fat into the egg mixture. Measure 1/2 cup (120ml) pasta-cooking water and add to pasta and egg mixture. Stir well to combine.











Vicky Wasik






Set mixing bowl over pot of boiling pasta water (make sure bottom of bowl does not touch the water) and cook, stirring quickly with tongs, until sauce thickens to a creamy, silky consistency and leaves trails as you stir. Remove from heat, season with salt if needed, and divide into bowls. Serve right away, topping with more grated cheese and freshly ground pepper as desired.











Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Large, metal heatproof mixing bowl (large enough to nest on top of the pasta pot without the bottom touching the boiling water)


   Notes  

Remember not to oversalt your pasta water; you'll add some of it to your sauce, which will already have salty ingredients. Feel free to substitute another dried pasta, such as penne, if desired. Guanciale, cured pork jowl, is generally considered the most authentic choice here; it's fattier than pancetta or bacon and often more heavily spiced, creating a pasta with pronounced spice notes and an extra-unctuous texture. Pancetta delivers the cleanest porky flavor, while American bacon, though less traditional, adds a hit of pleasant smoke. Use whichever you prefer.






Italian





Stovetop Pasta





Parmesan





Pecorino





Eggs















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




799
Calories


35g 
Fat


87g 
Carbs


32g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4




Amount per serving


Calories
799


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 35g
44%


Saturated Fat 10g
52%


Cholesterol 397mg
132%


Sodium 1175mg
51%


Total Carbohydrate 87g
32%


Dietary Fiber 4g
14%


Total Sugars 4g


Protein 32g




Vitamin C 0mg
0%


Calcium 205mg
16%


Iron 6mg
32%


Potassium 439mg
9%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Bucatini all'Amatriciana





















Pasta Alla Zozzona (Rigatoni With Sausage, Guanciale, and Egg Yolks) Recipe





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















Vegan Carbonara Pasta Recipe





















Bacon, Pancetta, and More: Cured Pork Products and How to Cook With Them





















Pasta alla Gricia Recipe





















The Right Way to Sauce Pasta





















Pasta Cacio e Uova (Neapolitan Pasta With Eggs and Cheese) Recipe


























Pasta alla Norcina (Creamy Pasta With Sausage) Recipe





















Pasta With Butternut Squash and Sage Brown Butter





















The Food Lab's Ultra-Gooey Stovetop Mac and Cheese Recipe





















Pasta alla Genovese (Pasta With Neapolitan Beef and Onion Ragù)





















Cheese-Filled Toasted Ravioli





















Ricotta Gnocchi With Asparagus and Prosciutto Recipe





















Creamy Orecchiette With Spring Onions, Fennel, and Bacon Recipe





















Classic Lasagna Bolognese






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



