












Creamy Orecchiette With Spring Onions, Fennel, and Bacon Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Ingredients





Pastas





Creamy Pastas




Creamy Orecchiette With Spring Onions, Fennel, and Bacon Recipe
This soubise-inspired creamy pasta sauce uses spring onions and fennel, along with bacon, cream, and cheese for a dish that is somehow both light and decadent.






By

Sasha Marx








 

Sasha Marx




 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Editor

Sasha is a senior culinary editor at Serious Eats. He has over a decade of professional cooking experience, having worked his way up through a number of highly regarded and award-winning restaurant kitchens, followed by years spent in test kitchens for food publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated May 25, 2023
























































(9)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print













































Why It Works

Using spring vegetables to turn French soubise into a creamy pasta sauce creates a dish with plenty of richness that still manages not to feel heavy.A small amount of baking soda helps weaken the vegetable cell walls, quickly softening them for easy blending while maintaining their bright flavor and color.A generous amount of black pepper balances the natural sweetness of fennel and onion.


Supermarket grocery shopping is not my strong suit. I get easily overwhelmed in the packed, sprawling aisles. And unless I'm shopping for work-related recipe development projects, I rarely walk into a supermarket with a fully thought-out plan or written grocery list. This inefficient approach inevitably leads to long, roundabout meandering, as I try to find some ingredients that catch my eye and spark an idea for dinner. Happily, the process becomes a lot more fun when spring vegetables pop up in the produce section; it's always exciting and inspiring to find those first bunches of in-season asparagus, green garlic, and spring onions.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



This year, the first of these to appear at my local supermarket were spring onions. Similar in appearance and flavor to scallions, spring onions are very young storage onions that are plucked out of the ground before they fully mature. When eaten raw, they have more allium bite than scallions, but cooking spring onions makes them meltingly tender and sweet.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I picked up a few bunches and, seeing as pasta is always on my mind, came up with the idea of combining spring onions with fennel for a creamy pasta sauce inspired by French soubise. While traditional soubise—a smooth purée made from onions gently cooked with butter and either béchamel or cream—is bone-white, this springtime version uses the tops of spring onions to create a bright green sauce with subtle vegetal sweetness that's balanced with smoky bacon, Parmigiano-Reggiano, and lots of freshly ground pepper. Tossed with a sauce-grabbing pasta shape like orecchiette, it's an easy and delicious alternative to the ubiquitous puréed soups that are in constant rotation this time of year.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I start by prepping the vegetables for the soubise. I trim and thinly slice the spring onions, separating the white and light green parts from the dark green ones.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I also core and slice a fennel bulb, reserving the fronds for garnish.



With the vegetables prepped, I can get to cooking, starting with the bacon. I cook whole strips of bacon until the meaty parts are crisp and the fat is tender. Keeping the slices whole, rather than cutting them into bite-size pieces before cooking, helps keep them from getting too crunchy and also makes for less babysitting while the bacon cooks—it's a lot easier to turn six pieces of bacon than it is to constantly stir a bunch of slivers around in a skillet.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Once the bacon is cooked through, I fish the rashers out of the pan and cut them into bite-size morsels. I set the bacon aside, but leave all the rendered fat right in the skillet.



The light-colored spring onion parts and fennel go straight into that same skillet, along with a splash of water and a sprinkling of salt, which helps draw out moisture and kick-start the softening process. I like to use a straight-sided sauté pan for this dish—it keeps the moisture released by the vegetables contained, and I don't run into the problem of onions riding up on the lip of the pan and browning, as can happen with a traditional skillet.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Once the vegetables have softened slightly, I add a pinch of baking soda. Baking soda weakens vegetable cell walls, which speeds up the softening process during cooking. This is a huge help for recipes that involve puréeing, especially when you want to preserve the green color of a vegetable, which can be dulled with the normal approach to vegetable softening: cooking the hell out of it. Just be aware that a little bit of baking soda goes a long way; adding too much can give food a metallic flavor that is not pleasant. But when used in the proper proportions, baking soda can help turn vegetables to a super-soft texture in just a few minutes, without having a detectable effect on flavor.



Once the onion whites and fennel are soft, I add in the green onion tops and cook them for a couple of minutes, until they're just starting to wilt. At that point, I stir in a cup of heavy cream and bring the whole mixture to a simmer, allowing it to thicken slightly.



Now it's time to buzz it all up into a smooth purée. Because the vegetables are so soft, the blending process is quick, which keeps the mixture from overheating and dulling the color. Because we'll be finishing the pasta in the sauté pan, I pour the purée back into the pan, passing it through a fine-mesh strainer along the way for extra smoothness.



All that's left to do is boil some pasta until it's just shy of al dente, and then finish it in the sauce. The orecchiette get added to the pan, along with the chopped bacon, some of the pasta cooking water, and a good amount of ground pepper.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Don't be shy with the pepper; you need its pungency to balance the natural sweetness of the fennel and spring onion.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Stir in plenty of cheese to finish the pasta off the heat. All that's left to do is some artful fennel frond placement and a final sprinkling of cheese. Spring has sprung. Celebrate in the right way—with a bowl of pasta.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik




March 2019




Recipe Details
Creamy Orecchiette With Spring Onions, Fennel, and Bacon Recipe




Cook
50 mins




Active
30 mins




Total
50 mins






Serves
4 servings




This soubise-inspired creamy pasta sauce uses spring onions and fennel, along with bacon, cream, and cheese for a dish that is somehow both light and decadent.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




6 slices (about 6 ounces; 170g) thick-cut bacon


1 pound (450g) spring onions, trimmed, white and green parts divided and thinly sliced (see note)


1 fennel bulb (about 1 pound; 450g), cored and thinly sliced, fronds reserved


1/4 cup (60ml) water


Kosher salt


1/8 teaspoon baking soda


1 cup (235ml) heavy cream


1 pound (450g) dried orecchiette pasta


Freshly ground black pepper


1 cup (about 3 ounces; 85g) grated Parmigiano-Reggiano, plus extra for serving















Directions





In a large, straight-sided sauté pan or Dutch oven, cook bacon over medium-low heat, turning occasionally, until meaty parts are crisp and fatty parts are tender, 8 to 10 minutes. Using tongs, transfer bacon to a cutting board and reserve rendered bacon fat in the pan. Cut bacon crosswise into 3/4-inch pieces; set aside.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Return pan to stovetop and increase heat to medium-high. Add white and light green spring onion parts, fennel, and water, season with salt and cook, stirring frequently with a rubber spatula, until vegetables just begin to soften, about 5 minutes. Add baking soda, stir to combine, and continue to cook until vegetables are very soft and beginning to break down, about 8 minutes longer.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add remaining green parts of spring onions. Cook until well-incorporated with vegetable mixture and just beginning to soften, about 3 minutes. Add cream, bring to a simmer, and cook until mixture is slightly thickened, about 2 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Transfer mixture to a blender and blend on high speed until smooth and emulsified, about 1 minute. Season lightly with salt. Wipe out sauté pan and transfer blended sauce back to the pan, passing through a fine-mesh strainer if desired. Warm sauce over low heat, occasionally scraping down the sides of the pan to prevent skin from forming.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Meanwhile, in a pot of salted boiling water, cook orecchiette until just shy of al dente (about 1 minute less than the package directs). Reserve pasta cooking water.





Transfer pasta to pan along with 1/2 cup pasta water and bacon, increase heat to high, and cook, stirring rapidly until sauce has thickened slightly and pasta is well-coated, about 1 minute. Remove from heat, season generously with pepper, add Parmigiano, and stir rapidly to combine. Season with salt, if needed. Divide pasta into serving bowls and garnish with reserved fennel fronds. Serve immediately, passing more cheese at the table.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Straight-sided sauté pan or Dutch oven, blender, fine-mesh strainer


   Notes  

Spring onions resemble scallions in appearance and flavor, but they're actually just very young storage onions that are pulled out of the ground at an earlier date, when they're still thin-skinned and mild in flavor. If you can't find spring onions, leeks or scallions can be used as substitutes.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

The finished pasta is best enjoyed immediately, but the blended sauce (without cheese) can be refrigerated for up to 2 days. Reheat gently before finishing with pasta, pasta water, pepper, and cheese.






Creamy Pastas





Holidays & Seasons





Spring Mains





Bacon





Fennel















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




979
Calories


44g 
Fat


106g 
Carbs


40g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4




Amount per serving


Calories
979


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 44g
57%


Saturated Fat 22g
112%


Cholesterol 127mg
42%


Sodium 1473mg
64%


Total Carbohydrate 106g
39%


Dietary Fiber 10g
36%


Total Sugars 12g


Protein 40g




Vitamin C 35mg
175%


Calcium 387mg
30%


Iron 7mg
38%


Potassium 1338mg
28%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Pasta alla Norcina (Creamy Pasta With Sausage) Recipe





















Pasta ai Funghi (Creamy Pasta With Mushrooms)





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















Pasta Primavera (Pasta With Spring Vegetables) Recipe





















Bucatini all'Amatriciana





















Penne Boscaiola (Woodsman-Style Pasta With Mushrooms and Bacon) Recipe





















Pasta Con le Sarde (Sicilian Pasta With Sardines) Recipe





















Pasta With Beans and Greens Recipe


























23 Fresh Fennel Recipes That Everyone Will Love





















The Ultimate Beef Stroganoff Recipe





















26 Egg Recipes That Make Great Dinners





















34 Valentine's Day Recipes for a Romantic Dinner at Home





















Roast Pork Shoulder Ragù in Bianco With Pasta Recipe





















Peas and Thank You: 14 Recipes for Sweet or Snap Peas





















Orecchiette con le Cime di Rapa (Apulian Orecchiette With Broccoli Rabe) Recipe





















Pasta chi Vruoccoli Arriminati (Sicilian Pasta With Cauliflower and Toasted Breadcrumbs) Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



