












Chocolate-Covered Candy Corn Layer Cake Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 















































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Course





Desserts





Cakes




Chocolate-Covered Candy Corn Layer Cake Recipe






By

Yvonne Ruperti








 

Yvonne Ruperti




 


 

 


 

 


 



Yvonne Ruperti is a food writer, recipe developer, former bakery owner, and cookbook author. She is also an adjust professor of baking at the Culinary Institute of America in Singapore.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated May 15, 2019



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 




 A halloween candy staple in cake form. .
Yvonne Ruperti
































Butter blasted cake layered with buttery buttercream and enrobed in chocolate ganache. The perfect un-scary Halloween cake.



Notes: Wilton brand makes a butter flavoring. The brand that I used was not Wilton, and because there may be differing strengths between brands, I would add the extract to taste (though the batter does have raw eggs in it). This cake is meant to have a really intense butter flavor. I used Wilton color pastes in Lemon Yellow, Orange, and Terra Cotta.




Recipe Details
Chocolate-Covered Candy Corn Layer Cake Recipe




Active
2 hrs




Total
0 mins






Makes
1 cake






Save









Print







   Ingredients   



For Cake:


7 large egg whites


1 1/2 cups milk, divided


1 teaspoon vanilla extract


4 1/2 cups (18 ounces) cake flour


2 1/4 cups (15 3/4 ounces) granulated sugar


2 tablespoons baking powder


1 3/4 teaspoons salt


18 tablespoons (9 ounces) unsalted butter, cut into cubes, softened


3 tablespoons butter flavoring (see note)


1/2 teaspoon yellow food coloring


3/4 teaspoon orange food coloring


1/4 teaspoon terra cotta food coloring (see note)


For Frosting:


10 tablespoons (5 ounces) unsalted butter, softened


1 1/4 cups (5 ounces) confectioners' sugar


1 tablespoon milk


1 tablespoon butter flavoring (or to taste)


For Ganache:


6 ounces bittersweet chocolate, finely chopped


2/3 cup heavy cream


Candy corn to garnish cake














Directions





For the cake: Adjust oven rack to middle position and preheat oven to 350°F. Line 3 8- by 2-inch round cake pans with parchment paper. Grease pans.





Whisk egg whites with 1/2 cup milk and vanilla; set aside. Place flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in stand mixer fitted with paddle attachment. Mix on low speed until combined, about 1 minute. Add butter and mix on low speed just until moistened. Add remaining 1 cup milk and mix until combined.





Increase speed to medium-high and mix batter until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Reduce speed to low and mix in reserved egg white mixture until combined. Mix in butter flavoring.





Divide batter evenly between three bowls. Add yellow food coloring to one of the bowls until it becomes a bright shade of yellow. Add both orange and terra cotta food coloring to another bowl of batter until it becomes a deep shade of orange.





Scrape batters into the prepared pans and bake until just set and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, about 23 minutes. Let cakes cool in pan for 15 minutes, then transfer to wire rack to cool completely, about an hour.





For the frosting: Place butter, confectioners' sugar, milk, and butter flavoring in mixer fitted with paddle attachment. Beat on medium speed until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Flavor to taste with butter flavoring.





To assemble cake: Place yellow layer on an 8-inch plate and spread with about 1/2 cup frosting. Place orange layer on top and spread with about 1/2 cup frosting. Place white layer on top. Use remaining frosting to fill in any gaps along the sides.





For the ganache: Heat chocolate and cream in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of barely simmering water, gently whisking, until melted and smooth. Let cool briefly, until the consistency is pourable but not runny.





Place cake (on plate) on a wire rack that's been set in a rimmed baking sheet. Pour ganache over top of cake, letting it run down the sides. Chill until ganache is set, about 20 minutes, Garnish top with candy corn.




   Special equipment  

3 8-inch cake pans, mixer


  This Recipe Appears In  

Chocoholic: Chocolate Covered Candy Corn Layer Cake






Cakes





Layer Cake





Halloween












































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Bumpy Cake (Chocolate Cake with Vanilla Buttercream and Chocolate Fudge) Recipe





















Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake





















Pig Pickin' Cake (Mandarin Orange Cake With Pineapple Whipped Cream Frosting) Recipe





















Texas Sheet Cake Recipe





















Honey-Vanilla Almond Cake





















Chocolate Chip Skillet Cookie Recipe





















Coconut Layer Cake with Chocolate Glaze Recipe





















Yellow Birthday Cake with Fluffy Chocolate Ganache Frosting


























Homemade Sno Balls Recipe





















Blackberry Cake With Cream Cheese Frosting Recipe





















Upside-Down Blueberry Muffin Recipe





















Fudgy Chocolate Pretzel Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















Sweet Story Valentine Cake Recipe





















Peanut Butter Chocolate Cake Recipe





















One-Bowl, Overnight Cinnamon Rolls Recipe | BraveTart






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



