












Yeolmu Kimchi (Quick-Fermented Young Radish Greens) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Course





Sides





Vegetable Sides




Yeolmu Kimchi (Quick-Fermented Young Radish Greens) Recipe
This quick radish kimchi is crunchy and cooling, perfect for complementing a bowl of barley bibimbap or noodles.






By

Seoyoung Jung








 

Seoyoung Jung




 


 

 


 

 


 



Seoyoung Jung is a Korean chef who co-created Bburi Kitchen, a blog dedicated to expanding the world's perception of Korean cuisine.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process





and

Sonja Swanson








 

Sonja Swanson




 


 

 


 



Sonja Swanson writes about food, travel, and culture from the American Southwest with annual trips to Korea. She was 2019 recipient of the 11th Hour Food and Farming Journalism Fellowship at UC Berkeley and is currently an audio producer for Gastropod.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 10, 2022



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Liz Clayman

































In This Recipe


Expand





What Is Yeolmu Kimchi?




Uses for Yeolmu Kimchi




Pul and the Fermentation Process









Why It Works

The addition of a potato porridge speeds up fermentation, while also counteracting the grassy flavors in the greens.Cabbage greens add sweetness to balance out the radish greens' peppery kick.Optional additions of salted shrimp, fish sauce, and gochugaru allow you to make the kimchi as funky or spicy as you'd like.




The recipe and introductory material are by Korean chef Seoyoung Jung, as told to her collaborator, writer Sonja Swanson.

   What Is Yeolmu Kimchi?  

One of my favorite summer kimchis, called yeolmu kimchi, is made with young, crunchy radish greens—usually with their tiny radish roots still attached. This is a quick kimchi that’s ready to eat in just a few days, with the help of a starchy porridge to speed up the fermentation.



This kimchi brings back memories from my childhood, when I lived with my grandmother in Gangwon Province, north of Seoul. Our house had a courtyard, and in the summertime, we liked to open the doors and put a small table down with a view of the outdoors and our garden full of eggplant, chiles, cucumbers, and perilla leaves. Korean summers are humid and sticky, but we’d play outside, sweaty and happy. When my grandmother and mother called us home for lunch, they’d often serve up bowls of cold noodles topped with crunchy, cooling yeolmu kimchi.


   The Role of Kimchi in Korean Cuisine  

Kimchi is special to us Koreans. Traditionally, it played an important role in the Korean diet by preserving vegetables during the hot summers and freezing-cold winters. Even though we have refrigeration today, we love kimchi for its funk, fragrance, and flavor. It’s sour, salty, sweet, bitter, and savory all at once, pairing well with meats and adding variety to any meal.



We consider kimchi to be good for our health, and there are even Koreans who pack it when traveling abroad. With over 200 kinds of kimchi, we’ll have at least one type in our fridge at all times, usually something seasonal and often something well-aged. It really depends on personal preference—some Koreans love the fresh, bright flavors of new kimchi, and others love the deeper, more mellow flavors of aged kimchi.


   Uses for Yeolmu Kimchi  

Yeolmu kimchi can be eaten fresh, as soon as a day after it's made, though I prefer the flavors you get after about a week. If you make a mild version, without fish sauce or the extra gochugaru (Korean red chile flakes), it’s nice as a banchan (side dish) with spicy, meaty foods.












Serious Eats / Daniel Gritzer



If you make your yeolmu kimchi with the fish sauce and extra gochugaru, it’s great for barley bibimbap: Start with pressed barley (found at Korean grocery stores), soak for 30 minutes with your rice (using a 1:1 ratio), and cook as you’d normally cook rice. Top the bowl of warm barley rice with a generous ladleful of kimchi.



The spicy version of yeolmu kimchi is also good with cold noodles: Boil some somyun (thin wheat noodles), chill, and top with cold, clear beef broth and yeolmu kimchi. Garnish with a thin slice of cooked beef and a boiled egg sliced in half lengthwise, and pour in some kimchi juice.



And if you have any yeolmu kimchi left after a few months and it’s getting old, don’t toss it out! Use it for kimchi fried rice, sautés, or seafood braises. Every Korean grandma knows a hundred ways of using old kimchi, and trust me, you don’t want to waste good flavor.












Serious Eats / Liz Clayman


   Pul and the Fermentation Process  

Keep in mind that this is a quick ferment: Yeolmu kimchi uses pul (풀), a starchy porridge for kimchi, to speed up the fermentation process. In all kimchi, as with other preserved vegetables like sauerkraut and dill pickles, naturally occurring lactobacillus bacteria consume the vegetable sugars, producing lactic acid (preserving the vegetables) and CO2 (giving us bubbles...and, if your container is sealed too tight, sometimes explosions). The starchy pul not only balances out the greens’ grassy flavors, but also gives the lactobacillus a megadose of carbohydrates to chow down on and really get the fermentation started.



The exact amount of pul you use isn’t important, and when you're making kimchi for long-term storage, it isn’t even necessary. (Given enough time, the vegetables have more than enough sugars for a full fermentation.) But for quick fermentations like this one, the pul helps speed up the process. Any kind of starch, such as glutinous rice flour or all-purpose flour, can be used to make the porridge, but I prefer a basic white potato simply simmered in water, then blended into a slurry.



The radish greens (yeolmu) bring a wee bit of peppery kick, and the young cabbage greens, eolgari baechu (얼갈이 배추), also sold as put-baechu (풋배추), add a nice contrasting sweetness. I use a 1:1 ratio of radish to cabbage greens, but you can go with an all-radish version for more pungency.



This kimchi is easily adaptable to your taste. With the optional additions of salted shrimp, fish sauce, and gochugaru, you can make these radishes as funky and spicy as you like.


   How to Make Yeolmu Kimchi  
  Step 1: Make a Porridge (Pul)  

For seasonal, quickly consumed kimchi recipes like this one, I start by making the pul (풀), or porridge. You can use any kind of potato you have, but waxy potatoes tend to boil and blend down into a stickier porridge, making the mixing a much gummier process. Your choice of potato, however, won’t affect the flavor. Russets are a good choice, as are basic white potatoes.


  Step 2: Prep and Salt the Greens  

When I prep the greens, I split any thick radish roots in half or even quarters lengthwise, so they ferment evenly along with the little guys. I handle the greens as minimally as possible and avoid salad spinners, which run the risk of bruising their tender leaves and releasing too much grassy flavor. Anyhow, they don’t have to dry perfectly; kimchi is a wet preparation, and there's more water on the way! After you wash and drain your greens, it’s time to salt them.



I salt the greens in a large bowl, with coarse sea salt if possible. Fine salt penetrates too quickly, making it difficult to control the seasoning.



Salting vegetables for kimchi is often a matter of personal taste, but a rough estimate would put the typical final salinity at around 3 to 5%. For the vegetables, the general idea is to add enough salt to wilt the vegetables at room temperature in about an hour or two—maybe roughly a good handful per layer of greens (or around 15% salt by weight; don't worry, you'll rinse most of this salt off after wilting the greens).



When they're ready, your wilted greens shouldn’t be stiff, but should instead bend easily when you hold a piece up. I recommend rinsing one piece to taste it—it should taste pleasantly salty. If you didn’t get it quite right in this step, you’ll be able to compensate later with your brine.



Now it's time to rinse the wilted greens of excess salt and drain them well.


  Step 3: Add Flavorings  










Serious Eats / Daniel Gritzer



For the base of my seasoning, I roughly chop fresh red chiles and stir them into a paste of onion, garlic, ginger, and the cooled porridge (pul). When I want a more refreshing summer kimchi, I’ll stop here. The optional salted shrimp (saewoojeot) and fish sauce add umami and salt, but many prefer the clean and sharp taste of kimchi without them. If you’re feeling funky, go for it—it’s up to you!


  Step 4: Cover With Brine  

The trick in this recipe is to use a basic saltwater brine to balance out the overall saltiness of the kimchi and create a good environment for the lactobacillus to thrive, ultimately arriving, as mentioned above, at a salinity of about 3 to 5%. If my chile paste mixture isn't salty enough, this is where I can add more salt. And vice versa—if I made my mixture too salty (don’t forget, shrimp paste and fish sauce add salt!), I’ll make a milder brine here. You can compensate for oversalted greens with the brine, too.



The salt is important not just for flavor but also for tipping the scales in favor of friendly lactobacillus. Most nasty food bacteria don't do well in salty environments, but lactobacillus does.



Most importantly, don't stress too much, since you have some latitude here in terms of the salt level. While you can calculate it all by weight, it's just as easy to do it by taste. Remember, you want the overall saltiness of the kimchi to be somewhere in the zone of ocean water, which is a bit saltier than what most of us consider to be the "perfect" level of seasoning in the food we eat.



To finish my kimchi prep, I place the rinsed and drained greens in a large container and cover them with the onion and chili paste, along with the pul (if using). Then I pour the brine in on top of that, making sure it's enough to fully cover all the solid ingredients.



Don’t forget to keep your kimchi away from air. All the vegetables should be fully submerged in the brine; use a plate, fermentation weight, or a layer of plastic wrap pressed against the surface to keep the air off the greens. Lactobacillus do their work with anaerobic fermentation, so just remember: Kimchi hates air!












Serious Eats / Liz Clayman



Keep it out on the counter for a day, or until you just start to smell that funky fermentation starting up, then store it in the fridge. After about a week, the kimchi should be ready to eat.












Serious Eats / Liz Clayman




September 2018




Recipe Details
Yeolmu Kimchi (Quick-Fermented Young Radish Greens) Recipe




Active
2 hrs




Total
24 hrs






Serves
48 servings




Makes
3 quarts




This quick radish kimchi is crunchy and cooling, perfect for complementing a bowl of barley bibimbap or noodles.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Porridge (Pul, 풀):


2 medium russet potatoes (about 1 pound; 450g), peeled and cut into large pieces (avoid waxy, high-moisture potatoes)


For the Greens:


4 bunches yeolmu (열무; Korean young radish greens, with small roots attached), about 2.5 pounds or 1.1kg


1 bunch eolgari baechu (얼갈이 배추; young, green winter cabbage), about 2.5 pounds or 1.1kg (see notes)


Coarse sea salt


For the Seasoning Paste:


15 to 20 medium spicy fresh red chiles (about 10 ounces; 280g)


2 Korean cheongyang chiles (or jalapeños)


1 large white onion (about 1 pound; 450g), roughly chopped


8 medium cloves garlic (about 2 3/4 ounces; 80g)


One 1 1/2–inch piece ginger, peeled and sliced


1/4 cup saewoojeot (salted shrimp), optional (see notes)


1/4 cup gochugaru (Korean chile flakes), optional (see notes)


1 to 2 tablespoons myeolchi aekjeot (Korean anchovy sauce), optional (see notes)















Directions





For the Porridge: Add peeled potatoes to a saucepan and cover with enough water to submerge. Bring to a simmer and cook until soft enough to pierce with a fork, about 20 minutes. While potatoes are hot, break up with a fork. Using an immersion blender or countertop blender, purée potatoes with the cooking water until smooth. Set aside to cool to room temperature.











Serious Eats / Daniel Gritzer






To Prep the Greens: Using a paring or tourné knife, clean the yeolmu by trimming any fibrous stems and damaged leaves and scraping the radish roots clean while keeping them attached to the leaves. Pay extra attention to the top part of the roots, where a lot of soil tends to hide. Wash radish greens well of any dirt or sand; allow to drain, but do not spin dry.





Thoroughly clean and trim any roots, woody bits, or damaged leaves from the cabbage. Wash cabbage well of any sand and dirt; allow to drain, but do not spin dry. Cut the cleaned radish greens and cabbage into 2-inch pieces.





In a very large bowl, lay down one layer of greens, then sprinkle a handful of salt on top. Repeat until all your greens have been layered with salt. (If you want to weigh the salt, you should use about 15% of the weight of the greens, though the amount of salt doesn’t need to be perfect, as it will be rinsed away soon. The more salt you use, the faster the greens will wilt, and vice versa.) Toss the leaves gently a couple of times; be careful not to bruise the leaves while tossing. Let stand at room temperature until wilted, 1 to 2 hours.





Rinse a piece of cabbage or kimchi and taste it. If you taste a little saltiness, it’s ready. The radish stems should also bend gently when you hold them upright, while still maintaining some crunch. Rinse the wilted greens gently in cold water and drain again.





Meanwhile, Make the Seasoning Paste: Roughly chop red and green chiles into 1/8-inch pieces. In a blender, purée chiles with onion, garlic, ginger, saewoojeot (if using), gochugaru (if using), and myeolchi aekjeot (if using) until smooth.





Mix the room-temperature porridge into chile-onion paste. If saewoojeot and myeolchi aekjeot have been omitted, season to taste with salt. Taste the paste; it should be about as salty as a well-seasoned soup, and no more so. Season with additional salt only if needed.





To Make the Kimchi: Add well-drained greens to a large fermentation crock or nonreactive container and pour the chile mixture over the top.





Combine 2 quarts (1.9L) water with enough salt to make a mild brine. If your chile paste was too salty, you should make a brine that tastes about as salty as tears (about 2% salt by weight); if your chile paste wasn’t salty enough, make your brine as salty as the ocean (about 3% salt by weight). Pour brine over greens and paste, then press greens down. There should be enough brine to cover all the greens; if not, make more brine and add it until there's enough to cover.





Press greens down to fully submerge them, then seal with an airtight lid. You can use a plate, a fermentation weight, or plastic wrap to keep the greens submerged. What's important is that the greens are not exposed to the air.





Allow mixture to stand at room temperature until you begin to see signs of fermentation (a slightly funky smell and little bubbles of gas on top of the kimchi), about 1 day. Transfer to refrigerator. You can start eating kimchi right away, but it tastes best after about 7 to 10 days.




   Special Equipment  

Immersion blender or countertop blender.


   Notes  

If you don’t have eolgari baechu, either use the tender yellow cores from Napa cabbage or halve the rest of this recipe and add the juice from 1/4 of an Asian pear.



If you prefer a cleaner, less fishy flavor, you can skip the optional saewoojeot and myeolchi aekjeot and season only with salt. But if you're a fan of deep umami flavor, use either or both of those ingredients. For spicier kimchi, add the gochugaru; for less spicy kimchi, omit it.






Vegetable Sides





Korean





Gluten-free Sides





Fermentation





Radishes















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




27
Calories


0g 
Fat


6g 
Carbs


1g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 48




Amount per serving


Calories
27


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 0g
0%


Saturated Fat 0g
0%


Cholesterol 0mg
0%


Sodium 424mg
18%


Total Carbohydrate 6g
2%


Dietary Fiber 1g
4%


Total Sugars 1g


Protein 1g




Vitamin C 17mg
85%


Calcium 41mg
3%


Iron 1mg
5%


Potassium 324mg
7%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Kimchi 101: It Ain't Just Cabbage





















For Fermentation, We Love E-Jen Containers





















Kimchi-Brined Fried Chicken Sandwich Recipe





















What to Do With Kimchi





















Baechu Kimchi (Napa Cabbage Kimchi)





















Homemade Vegan Kimchi Recipe





















How to Make Fermented Hot Sauce





















The Science of Lactic Acid Fermentation: Pickles, Kraut, Kimchi, and More


























35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















Bossam (Korean Boiled-Pork Wraps) Recipe





















33 Stir-Fry Recipes For Your Wok





















How to Stock a Korean Pantry: Jeot, Jang, and More Ingredients to Know





















Homemade Sauerkraut





















Doenjang Jjigae (Korean Fermented-Bean-Paste Stew) Recipe





















Korean Food 101: Essential Recipes to Know and Love





















48 Homemade Food Gifts for the Holidays






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



