












Oven-Dried Grapes (a.k.a. Raisins) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Method





Baking





Baked Fruit




Oven-Dried Grapes (a.k.a. Raisins) Recipe
Homemade raisins are plumper and juicier, with a flavor that's truer to that of a fresh grape, only more intense.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated May 23, 2023



























































WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































In This Recipe


Expand





Why Make Raisins at Home?




Testing Drying Methods




Storing Homemade Raisins









Why It Works

A low oven temperature dries the grapes more than it cooks them, preserving some of their fresh flavor.The juices on the baking sheet dry into a syrup, which caramelizes on the skins of the grapes, adding extra flavor.Using different grapes yields a variety of colors and flavors.


When I recently shared my recipe for a kale salad with oven-dried grapes and blue cheese, I got a couple humorous comments that gently questioned the logic of making raisins at home when they're readily available by the box. But I also heard from a lot of people who wanted to know more. Chief among them was our own Stella Parks, who was excited by the potential baking applications.


   Why Make Raisins at Home?  

The idea is exciting because oven-dried grapes aren't at all the same as store-bought raisins. They're larger, plumper, and juicier, and, if you use a variety of grapes, they have the potential to deliver a range of grape flavors, too. That grape flavor, meanwhile, is closer to that of fresh grapes than a fully dehydrated raisin is—it's just more intensely concentrated, with a light caramelization from the sugars on the exteriors of the grapes (more on that below). This is because ovens, even at their lowest settings, are hotter than a dedicated dehydrator. Oven-drying them yourself also gives you control over the degree of dryness: Do you want them more plump and fresh, or more concentrated and shriveled?



In practice, what this recipe means, aside from a really fun addition to salads, is that you can stud baked goods, like homemade bagels and bran muffins, with these fat, juicy beauties and get results very different from what you'd see with regular raisins (even rehydrated ones). Other ideas: work them into a bread pudding, use them as a more interesting accompaniment to cheeses on a cheese platter, and much, much more.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik


   Testing Drying Methods  

In my original round of testing, I tried out a few different methods of oven-drying the grapes, based on tips I'd read online. Some recipes suggest blanching them first, for instance, which they claimed would crack the skins, giving moisture more escape routes and leading to faster dehydration. Others said to cut the grapes in half, another road to exposing the interior of the grape and speeding the drying process.



In reality, though, my tests revealed that the time savings provided by those extra steps were small and, at least in my eyes, not worth the effort of either pre-blanching the batch or hand-slicing each individual grape. That's good news, because it means less work for you. All you have to do is put the grapes on a rimmed baking sheet, pop them in a low oven, and wait.



This time around, I decided to try out a larger variety of grapes, using black, red, and green seedless, just to see how much of a flavor difference there was from one to the next. Because of the time of year, I couldn't find less common varieties of grapes, like Concords, which would have been fun. In any event, even among basic commercial varieties, there were noticeable differences in flavor as the grapes dried, so it stands to reason that other grapes, with even more unique flavors, would lead to even bigger flavor gains. My green ones were the most tart, with a delicate floral taste; black grapes came out the sweetest; and reds somewhere in the middle.



About that caramelization I mentioned above. Fructose, the primary sugar in grapes, doesn't begin to caramelize until it hits 230°F (110°C). Given how water-laden grapes are and the fact that the water's boiling point will prevent the interiors of the grapes from surpassing 212°F (100°C), at least until a whole lot of it has cooked off, there's not much caramelization happening inside the grapes. But as they cook on a baking sheet, their juices leak out and pool below them, quickly drying on the sheet into a thick syrup. That syrup does reach caramelization temperatures, and some of it clings to the exteriors of the grapes. It's extremely delicious (I even licked it off my baking sheets afterward), but if you don't want a caramelized flavor at all, you could suspend the grapes on a wire rack set over the baking sheet, which would keep them from sitting in those juices as they dry in the oven.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



In all of my tests, I used the lowest temperature allowed by my oven, but Stella did her own tests and reported that you can get away with bumping the temperature up as high as 300°F (150°C) if you're willing to trade the fruit's vibrant color for darker, faster results. Exactly how much time is shaved off depends on your oven, your grapes, and how much you allow them to dry out. I had batches that were ready in anywhere from three to four and a half hours at 225°F (110°C), and Stella's were done in four hours at 300°F (though she made a triple batch, and, when we compared notes, it looked like she dried hers more than I did mine).












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik


   Storing Homemade Raisins  

The last big question, of course, is storage. Fully dehydrated raisins keep for many months, if not longer, but my testing revealed that these juicier oven-dried grapes have a shorter lifespan. After about three weeks in the refrigerator, mine started to taste kind of strange...not spoiled, really, but just flat and no longer fresh. Stella's batch, meanwhile, is still going strong in her fridge after almost a month. The most likely explanation is that since hers were more dried than mine, their more concentrated sugars delivered a longer shelf life.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



You could try to control for this by weighing the grapes before and after, to be more precise in how much you allow them to dry (and therefore get a more accurate sense of how long they'll last—if you're willing to do the testing to figure that out), but that seems a little too fussy to me. Better, I think, is to keep in mind that there's a relationship between degree of dryness and shelf life, and not count on having your batch last more than two or three weeks.



Ultimately, the moral of the story is that you have control over how your oven-dried grapes turn out, which is more than store-bought raisins can say for themselves.




February 2017




Recipe Details
Oven-Dried Grapes (a.k.a. Raisins) Recipe




Prep
5 mins




Cook
4 hrs




Active
10 mins




Total
4 hrs 5 mins






Serves
8 servings




Makes
1 1/2 cups




Homemade raisins are plumper and juicier, with a flavor that's truer to that of a fresh grape, only more intense.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




3 large bunches seedless grapes, preferably mixed colors, stemmed


Vegetable or canola oil, for greasing















Directions





Preheat oven to 225°F (110°C). Very lightly grease 2 rimmed baking sheets with oil, then scatter grapes all over. Bake, checking periodically for doneness, until grapes are nicely shriveled and semi-dried but still slightly plump, about 4 hours (see note). (The exact time will depend on your grapes, your oven, and your preferred degree of dryness.) Let cool. Use a thin metal spatula to free any grapes that are stuck to the baking sheet.





The dried grapes can be refrigerated in a sealed container for about 3 weeks. (How long they keep will also depend on their degree of dryness; drier grapes will keep longer.)




   Special Equipment  

Rimmed baking sheets


   Notes  

The precise cooking time can vary quite a bit depending on the size of your grapes (larger ones will take longer to dry than smaller ones) and how your oven functions (some ovens are prone to big temperature swings, which can speed up and/or slow down total drying time). Make sure to check in on the progress of your grapes periodically to avoid any mishaps.


   Read More  

Raisin Bran Muffins
Homemade Bagels
Rum Raisin Ice Cream






Baked Fruit





Grape





Snacks & Appetizers















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




113
Calories


2g 
Fat


26g 
Carbs


1g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8




Amount per serving


Calories
113


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 2g
3%


Saturated Fat 0g
1%


Cholesterol 0mg
0%


Sodium 3mg
0%


Total Carbohydrate 26g
9%


Dietary Fiber 1g
5%


Total Sugars 22g


Protein 1g




Vitamin C 5mg
23%


Calcium 14mg
1%


Iron 1mg
3%


Potassium 271mg
6%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Kale Salad With Oven-Dried Grapes, Toasted Walnuts, and Blue Cheese Recipe





















The Best Way to Cook Whole Sweet Potatoes





















How to Make Choux Pastry (Pâte à Choux)





















How to Cook Dried Beans





















How to Roast Fall and Winter Vegetables | The Food Lab





















How to Make a Sheet-Pan Dinner With No Recipe





















Homemade Fresh Pasta





















The Best BLT (Bacon, Lettuce, and Tomato) Sandwich


























Choucroute Garnie à l'Alsacienne (Alsatian Braised Sauerkraut With Mixed Meats and Sausages) Recipe





















How to Buy, Store, Prep, and Cook Asparagus | The Food Lab





















Oven-Dry Your Grapes for a New Take on Kale Salad





















How to Cook Asparagus





















Koji Prime Rib





















Perfect Meringue Mushrooms Recipe





















Torrijas Caramelizadas (Spanish-Style Caramelized French Toast) Recipe





















The Best Fresh Tomato Sauce Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



