












Halloumi and Watermelon Salad Recipe
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 




























 



 








































































 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Salads





Greek





Watermelon





Summer Salads








Halloumi and Watermelon Salad
Halloumi, a salty hard cheese made of goat and sheep's milk, comes to life when grilled or pan fried.






By

Joshua Bousel








 

Joshua Bousel




 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 



Joshua Bousel is a Serious Eats old-timer, having started sharing his passion for grilling and barbecue recipes on the site back in 2008. He continues to develop grilling and barbecue recipes on his own site, The Meatwave, out of his home base of Durham, North Carolina.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated February 09, 2023





WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 
































Why It Works

Halloumi, a salty hard cheese made of goat and sheep's milk, comes to life when grilled or pan fried.


Living in Astoria, NY, it's impossible to take a step without hitting a Greek restaurant. It didn't take me long to find an affinity to the cuisine indigenous to my neighborhood, and after being a resident for six years and counting, there have been more than a few extraordinary discoveries.



But none get me quite as much as halloumi, a salty hard cheese made of goat and sheep's milk that comes to life when grilled or pan fried. After cooked, I usually enjoy this cheese with a dash of lemon juice or stuffed in a pita with tzatziki and all the toppings, but I heard that Cypriots particularly like halloumi with watermelon--and that idea had "perfect summer salad" written all over it.



There really isn't much to grilling halloumi, just slice and slap it on a hot grill until it blisters, then it's done. It's best while still warm, so I made sure to have the watermelon cut, tossed with a chifonade of fresh mint, before heading to the grill with the cheese.



As soon as the cheese was beautifully browned, I diced it, mixed it in with the watermelon and mint, and then added freshly ground black pepper to top it off. Despite the small list of the ingredients, every flavor was so unique that it became quite the complex salad; it was cool and warm, sweet and salty, spicy and minty, all of which combined to make a refreshing side that I can see fitting into almost any summer menu.




July 2008




Recipe Details
Halloumi and Watermelon Salad




Prep
30 mins




Cook
10 mins




Total
40 mins




Halloumi, a salty hard cheese made of goat and sheep's milk, comes to life when grilled or pan fried.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   



1/2 large seedless watermelon


3 heaping tablespoons of chiffonades of fresh mint


1lb halloumi cheese, sliced into 1/2 inch tall strips


Freshly ground black pepper














Directions





Light one chimney full of charcoal. While the charcoal is lighting, dice the watermelon into one-inch cubes and toss with the mint.





When all the charcoal is lit and covered with gray ash, pour out and spread coals out evenly over the charcoal grate. Grill the halloumi until it browns and starts to blister on each side, about one to three minutes per side.





Immediately dice the halloumi into half-inch cubes and toss in with watermelon and mint. Season with freshly ground black pepper to taste.










































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















5 Delicious Cheeses You Should Throw on the Grill





















Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad Recipe





















Halloumi and Vegetable Skewers Recipe





















Grilled Beef Kebabs With Yogurt-Mint Sauce and Onion Salad Recipe





















Grilled Panzanella Salad Recipe





















Pork Souvlaki With Pita and Tzatziki





















20 No-Cook Recipes for Summer





















Asparagus and Sweet Pea Frittata With Minty Spring Salad Recipe


























Kale Salad With Oven-Dried Grapes, Toasted Walnuts, and Blue Cheese Recipe





















20 Memorial Day Salad Recipes to Balance Out All That Meat





















Green Bean Salad With Pickled Peppers and Anchovy Dressing Recipe





















Adana Kebabs (Ground Lamb Kebabs)





















34 Recipes Starring Fresh, Ripe Summer Tomatoes





















The Best Egg Salad





















24 Zucchini Recipes For Your Summer Bounty





















Essential Peruvian Food: 10 Must-Eat Dishes to Seek Out






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



