












Creamy Sea Urchin (Uni) Pasta Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Seafood Mains





Italian





Stovetop Pasta





Creamy Pastas





Spaghetti, Bucatini, & Linguine








Creamy Sea Urchin (Uni) Pasta Recipe
Fresh sea urchin, Mexican crema, and Calabrian chile join forces in this quick and creamy pasta.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated June 02, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt

































In This Recipe


Expand





All About Uni (Sea Urchin)




Making the Sea Urchin Sauce




Finishing the Pasta









Why It Works

Blending sea urchin with Mexican crema or crème fraîche adds bright acidity to the sauce while keeping it creamy.This recipe uses very few ingredients, letting the ocean aroma of the sea urchin carry it.


Making sea urchin pasta is a lot like a toddler playing with Play-Doh: There are a million right ways to do it, and most of them are salty and delicious.



The effort-to-reward ratio of uni pasta is off the charts. It's hard to think of a simpler sauce or technique, and the briny, mineral, sweet, intense ocean flavor it delivers is something you'd typically expect to find only in the best restaurants.



There's just one mildly difficult part about it: getting the uni and paying for it. Okay, two difficult parts.



I'll get to sourcing it in a moment. As for price, uni is expensive, typically $5 to $10 per ounce. That said, its intense aroma means a little goes a long way; you need only about an ounce of uni per 75-gram serving of pasta. It's not an everyday dish, but it's an easy and impressive first course for a dinner party. Get your friends to bring the fancy Champagne to make up for the sunk costs (Champagne and uni pasta happen to go pretty darn well together).



Once you've decided to make the dish, there are a number of ways you can get from start to finish. I'm going to show you my favorite way, but you should feel free to follow your gut with each of the branching points in the recipe. It's really hard to mess this up.


   All About Uni (Sea Urchin)  

Sea urchins—uni (pronounced "oo-nee") in Japanese—are the little spiny echinoderms that live in cracks and crevices on coastal rocks and reefs. They vary greatly in size and appearance, but when we're talking about eating them, most of the time we're referring to the deep-purple, long-spined Pacific sea urchin from Hokkaido, Japan, or Santa Barbara, California. Or, alternatively, to the short-spined, coral-green Atlantic sea urchin from Maine, which is more common in the Northeast.



More specifically, we're really only talking about the bright-orange, roe-producing gonads of the animal. We euphemistically refer to these as "sea urchin roe" on menus and "tongues" in the kitchen, as the individual gonads have a papillate, tongue-like appearance.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Walk into any Japanese fish market, and you'll see neat rows of sea urchin roe sold in little wooden trays. I've rarely encountered past-its-prime sea urchin roe in these markets, but occasionally you'll find a tray with roe that looks a little muddy or has lost definition in its texture. If you see that, pass by.



If you don't have a Japanese fish market nearby, you can order it online from Fulton Fish Market or Browne Trading. (Please note: uni is a seasonal product that's usually available from late summer to fall and early winter.)



Sea urchin is pricey stuff, but you don't need much of it. I've found that an ounce to an ounce and a half of urchin roe per serving (four to eight tongues) is ample to infuse the dish with its distinct briny, iodine sweetness. That translates to about one typical tray of uni for a four-serving dinner.



Once you have the sea urchin, the next question is how best to incorporate it into the dish.



A few years ago, I had pasta ai ricci di mare in Catania, Sicily. That dish was made by sautéing garlic, anchovies, and chile flakes in olive oil; deglazing with wine; adding the sea urchin tongues, lightly broken up (they're so soft and custardy, they'll break down with just a few mashes of a spoon); and immediately tossed with pasta and pasta water.



The result was a dish that reads as a variation on pasta aglio e olio (pasta in a sauce of garlic and olive oil), with the garlic and chiles interspersed with creamy bits of sea urchin and a little acidity from the wine.



It's a lovely, classic preparation, but I've been craving more modern versions of the dish: the ones that take some influence from Japan and share more with rich carbonara than they do with aglio e olio. To get that, you need a blender, an immersion blender, or a food processor.


   Making the Sauce  

For creamy sea urchin pasta recipes, the typical process is to sauté garlic, shallots, and chiles in olive oil, then add the pasta and pour in a sauce made from raw sea urchin roe blended with softened butter or heavy cream. It's then cooked just long enough for the sauce to heat through and thicken, taking on a rich, glossy sheen.



Both of these basic processes produce decent, simple results, but I found the finished dishes lacked brightness. A small squeeze of lemon, added while tossing the pasta at the end, helped a little, but I wondered if there wasn't a better way to build some brightness in from the beginning.



The Sicilian idea of adding wine to the garlic-and-oil base was a step in the right direction. I tried it with a Pinot Grigio, a dry vermouth, and a dry sake. The wine and sake were both great; the vermouth will do in a pinch if it's all that's in your cabinet at the moment. I even tried it with a splash of a $6 dry California rosé, and it was still tasty!



Next, I looked at the butter I was blending with the sea urchin. Butter is notoriously effective at dulling bright flavors, and the cream wasn't much better. So I thought, "What if I pick a dairy ingredient with some natural brightness?" I rooted around in my fridge and pulled out some crème fraîche, sour cream, Greek yogurt, buttermilk, and Mexican-style crema.



Greek yogurt and buttermilk both made split, grainy sauces. Sour cream was a little too thick. Crème fraîche worked great, but that Mexican crema—that was the stuff!



The texture of Mexican crema is thinner than American sour cream, and it also has a more distinct tang. Most major brands, like Cacique and Marquez Brothers, contain small amounts of gums and thickeners that allow the crema to retain a creamy, glossy texture, even at higher temperatures.



Near me, Mexican crema is available at a number of Latin groceries, Safeway, and Whole Foods. If you can't find it, crème fraîche will do just fine, and if you can't find that either, a mixture of heavy cream and sour cream will get the job done. Blending the uni with the crema forms the silky base of the sauce.



Some recipes include umami-boosting ingredients, like anchovies, soy sauce, and miso paste. I didn't find any of them to be necessary, since uni has such a powerful savory flavor on its own.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



The only ingredient left to address was the chiles. I tried a number of chile sources, both fresh and dried. Some high-quality red pepper flakes work just fine, but if you want to go for the specialty-ingredient trifecta, pick up a bottle of Tutto Calabria Hot Chili Pepper Spread (available at Italian import stores or online). It's got a mild heat and bright chile flavor, bolstered by a blend of mushrooms and eggplants.


   Putting It Together  

Finishing the dish is no different from finishing any other simple pasta-and-sauce combo: Cook the pasta to just under al dente (so it has the very slightest chalky core at the middle), then briefly cook it with the sauce, along with a splash of pasta-cooking water.



That pasta water is the real key. It contains starches that were rinsed off the pasta as it cooks, giving it a wonderful ability to thicken and emulsify sauces without affecting flavor, and allowing each piece of pasta to pick up just the right amount of sauce.



My favorite trick for cooking dried pasta is to cook it in a smaller volume of water than is typically recommended. Much smaller. For long pasta shapes, like spaghetti or bucatini (the classic pairings for sea urchin), that means cooking it in a 12-inch skillet with just a couple inches of water added to it.



This method not only cooks the pasta faster—no need to wait for a giant pot to come to a boil—but also produces pasta with perfect texture and super-starchy water that's excellent for emulsifying sauces. (See my piece on spaghetti cacio e pepe for more details.)



To complete the dish, I cook bucatini in salted water in a 12-inch skillet, stirring it every once in a while. Meanwhile, I get busy making the base for the sauce, sautéing the shallots, garlic, and chile. Once the pasta is cooked, I use tongs to pick it up out of the skillet and transfer it directly to the pan with the olive oil and aromatics.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Finally, I pour on my puréed-sea-urchin sauce, kick up the heat to high, add a big splash of pasta water, and cook until the sauce is creamy, noodle-coating, and light, adding a little more pasta water as I cook if the sauce over-reduces (it always does).



A sprinkle of minced chives and chive flowers, a couple tongues of raw uni, and we're ready to serve.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Any pasta will work with this recipe. Wine, sake, or lemon juice will do. If you want to, you can add anchovies and soy sauce. You can keep the sea urchin whole and break it up with a spoon instead of puréeing it, if you prefer. The sauce can take a little less or a little more uni without breaking. You can use Calabrian Hot Spread Sauce, or you can simply use red pepper flakes.



It's flexible—just like Play-Doh.




September 2019




Recipe Details
Creamy Sea Urchin (Uni) Pasta Recipe




Prep
5 mins




Cook
20 mins




Active
20 mins




Total
25 mins






Serves
4 servings




Fresh sea urchin, Mexican crema, and Calabrian chile join forces in this quick and creamy pasta.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




4 to 6 ounces fresh sea urchin (uni); see note


1/3 cup (80g) Mexican-style crema, or crème fraîche


10 ounces (300g) dried long pasta, such as spaghetti or bucatini


Kosher salt


1 tablespoon (15ml) extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for drizzling


2 cloves garlic, finely minced


1 small shallot, finely minced


1 teaspoon (5ml) Calabrian hot chili spread (see note)


1/2 cup (125ml) dry sake or dry white wine, such as Pinot Grigio


Freshly ground black pepper


Small handful finely minced fresh chives, and chive blossoms for serving















Directions





Set aside 4 tongues of sea urchin to use as garnish. Combine remaining sea urchin and crema using a blender, immersion blender, food processor, or mini chopper. Blend until completely smooth. Set aside.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Place pasta in a 12-inch skillet or a saucepan and cover with water. Season with salt. Set over high heat and bring to a boil, stirring occasionally. Cook until pasta is just shy of al dente and retains a small chalky core.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Meanwhile, heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat until shimmering. Add garlic and shallot and cook, stirring constantly, until softened but not browned (lower heat if the aromatics threaten to brown), about 2 minutes. Add Calabrian chili spread and stir until homogeneous. Add sake or wine and cook until liquid is reduced down to less than 2 tablespoons, about 1 minute. Remove pan from heat and set aside until pasta is cooked.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






When pasta is cooked, use tongs to transfer the noodles directly from the boiling water to the pan with the garlic/oil mixture. Scrape uni purée into pan and add a few ounces of starchy pasta-cooking water. Set pan over high heat and cook, stirring and swirling constantly, until the sauce comes together and develops a creamy consistency and the pasta is fully cooked, about 1 minute. Add more pasta water as necessary to thin the sauce if it over-thickens. Season to taste with salt and black pepper.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Divide pasta between warmed serving bowls, drizzle each portion with more extra-virgin olive oil, garnish each with a whole sea urchin tongue, sprinkle with minced chives, and serve.




   Special Equipment  

Blender, immersion blender or food processor; 12-inch skillet


   Notes  

Sea urchin roe can be found in Japanese fish markets or ordered online (when in season, which is usually from late summer to early winter) from Fulton Fish Market or Browne Trading. If buying in person, pass over any sea urchin that looks muddy or has poorly defined texture.



Calabrian hot chili spread can be purchased online. Alternatively, substitute a pinch of red pepper flakes.


   Read More  

Sea Urchin (Uni) Butter
Sea Urchin Pasta with Fish Roe and Chives
Pasta con la Bottarga (Pasta With Bottarga)
Japanese Mentaiko Spaghetti (Pasta With Spicy Cod Roe and Butter Sauce)










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




472
Calories


15g 
Fat


61g 
Carbs


16g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4




Amount per serving


Calories
472


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 15g
19%


Saturated Fat 5g
23%


Cholesterol 45mg
15%


Sodium 333mg
14%


Total Carbohydrate 61g
22%


Dietary Fiber 3g
10%


Total Sugars 3g


Protein 16g




Vitamin C 6mg
28%


Calcium 46mg
4%


Iron 5mg
29%


Potassium 325mg
7%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Flying Sea Urchin Pasta with Fish Roe and Chives from 'The Catch'





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















Spaghetti Alle Vongole in Bianco (Spaghetti With White Clam Sauce)





















34 Valentine's Day Recipes for a Romantic Dinner at Home





















The Ultimate Beef Stroganoff Recipe





















Pasta Primavera (Pasta With Spring Vegetables) Recipe





















XO Elotes (Grilled Mexican Street Corn With XO Sauce)





















Spaghetti allo Scoglio (Spaghetti With Mixed Seafood) Recipe


























27 Quick and Easy Pasta Recipes





















I Tried 20 Backpacking Meals and While Some Were Gross, Others Were Downright Delightful





















How to Cook Italian Food Like an Italian





















The Best Creamy Chicken Enchiladas Recipe





















Lighter Fettuccine Alfredo Recipe





















Cacio e Pepe (Spaghetti With Black Pepper and Pecorino Romano) Recipe





















These 14 Pasta Pantry Ingredients Are Pricey—and Worth Every Penny





















Pressure Cooker Ragù Bolognese Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



