












The Tourné Knife: A Paring Knife That Turns Heads, and Why You Need It






















































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Knives








The Tourné Knife: A Paring Knife That Turns Heads, and Why You Need It
This knife is good for so much more than tormenting culinary students.






By

Sohla El-Waylly








 

Sohla El-Waylly




 


 

 


 



Sohla El-Waylly is a culinary creator, video host, and CIA graduate whose work can be found on Serious Eats, Bon Appetit, The New York Times, Food52, YouTube, and more.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 14, 2023













Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik































My first tourné knife experience was a brutal one. A tourné knife is a paring knife with a short, curved blade. They’re also referred to as "bird’s beak" knives, but a more appropriate name might be Azazel, Inciter of Anguish. You see, the primary function of this demonic blade is to "turn" a vegetable into a two-inch-long, seven-sided football. Members of the fine-dining occult believe this shape holds the power to cook more evenly because it rotates better in a pan.



I first tournéed in culinary school, when the chef challenged us to make one perfect hepta-potato in order to get a passing grade for the day. Every student failed, potato scraps covered the floor, and I immediately condemned my tourné knife back to hell.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



We met again a year later, when I staged at a restaurant that some say is the best in the world. A stage (often pronounced "stäzh") is a stint of unpaid work to see if you’ve got the chops for a culinary job—or, in my case, an unpaid internship. I was handed a tourné knife, stationed in front of a 28-pound case of fennel, and tasked with turning each petal into a one-and-a-half-inch teardrop. I managed to remain spirited and optimistic during the first six hours, but hours six through 12 were dark times indeed. When the chef came around to evaluate my work, he chucked all the fennel tears I had sacrificed my sanity for and told me to give up cooking altogether. I don’t remember the details of the scuffle that followed, but I’m sure the diners won’t ever forget the sight of me being dragged out of the restaurant by toqued thugs.



Just when I thought the knife was done haunting me, one seemed to have snuck into my cutlery drawer at home. My husband is a tourné acolyte, and he was hell-bent on converting me. At first, I couldn’t have been more resistant, and went so far as to refuse to eat anything prepped with the satanic shiv. But eventually, his persistence wore me down.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Under his tutelage, I came to view the knife not as an instrument of torture, but as a sort of miniature scythe, imbued with a divine power to handle round objects like no straight-bladed counterpart can. Daniel Gritzer has argued that bird’s beak knives aren’t very useful for home cooks, but I don’t think there's a better way to peel onions and shallots: The sharp tip scores the skins, while the slim blade easily slips under the papery hulls, allowing you to undress alliums in two swift strokes. Making French onion soup just got a lot easier.



But that’s not all it’s good for. Due to its superior facility with spherical things, the curved blade can also quickly carve thick twists of citrus peel, perfect for flaming over an Old Fashioned cocktail. Because the blade is short, you can closely grip the knife with your entire hand in order to securely peel oddball items, like a ridge-y acorn squash or an especially knobby ginger root, or delicate ones that require extra control—held properly, it’ll give you enough precision to peel slippery grapes for pickling and trim tough artichoke stems for braising. I love it for loosening the segments from a halved grapefruit if I want to feel especially pampered in the morning.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Even if peeling grapes isn’t in your repertoire, a tourné’s tip alone makes owning the knife worthwhile. It’s ideal for hulling strawberries and quickly removing the cores from Brussels sprouts. I’ve even come to use it for carving up potatoes, though I mainly prefer it for digging out stubborn eyes, not laboriously sculpting tiny footballs. I still get twitchy whenever I’m alone in a room with a tourné knife and a fennel bulb, but the many other charms of this little knife have possessed me. I reach for it over and over again every time I cook, even if I don’t have any plans to torture culinary students and interns.



The Essential Knives Every Home Cook Needs




January 2018













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Essential Knives Every Home Cook Needs





















The 4 Best Carving and Slicing Knives for Large Roasts





















We Tested 16 Santoku Knives—Here Are Our Three Favorites





















What's the Difference Between Western and Japanese Chef's Knives?





















We Tested 30 Chef’s Knives to Find Our Favorite Multitaskers





















We Shucked 150 Oysters to Find the Best Oyster Knives





















The Best Serrated Bread Knives, According to Our Tests





















We Tested 13 Nakiri Knives—Three Sliced Through the Competition


























We Tested Paring Knives—Here Are Our Favorites





















An Affordable Chef's Knife That Punches Above Its Weight Class





















The 18 Knives Kenji's Collected Over the Years





















We Tested 22 Steak Knives—Our Winners Sliced Through Steak Like Butter





















The 4 Knife Cuts Every Cook Should Know





















How to Prepare, Peel, and Cut Butternut Squash





















19 Essential Thanksgiving Tools





















College-Bound? Here's the Kitchen Gear to Bring With You






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



