












Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Savory





South American





Braised & Stewed Chicken





Chicken Thighs








Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe
These traditional Bolivian pies are part empanada and part soup dumpling, featuring a buttery pastry crust filled with a saucy chicken stew.






By

Sohla El-Waylly








 

Sohla El-Waylly




 


 

 


 



Sohla El-Waylly is a culinary creator, video host, and CIA graduate whose work can be found on Serious Eats, Bon Appetit, The New York Times, Food52, YouTube, and more.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated November 14, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print













































In This Recipe


Expand





A Strong, Gelatinous Broth




Making the Stew




A Sturdy Dough




Assembling the Salteñas









Why It Works

A concentrated, gelatin-rich stock makes the stew easy to handle when cold and juicy when hot.Roasting the wings adds deep, browned flavors to the broth.Bone-in chicken thighs add more flavor and body to the stew.Hot water aids gluten development in the pastry, providing more structure to contain the juicy stew.


There’s a lot riding on your salteña-eating game.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Salteñas are the Bolivian version of an empanada, but unlike empanadas, these chubby football-shaped pastries are overflowing with brothy stew. They feature the geyser-like qualities of a soup dumpling, all wrapped up in a sweet and tender crust. One wrong bite will leave hot broth bursting through the pastry, both scalding your fingers and threatening to stain your reputation. In Bolivia the first to dribble is stuck with the bill, while excessive spilling means you’ll be haunted by five years of bad sex. I usually smash the whole thing in a bowl and dig in with a spoon—I wonder what that says about me?



The key to packing the pastry with maximum soup-age is a sticky and concentrated gelatin-rich broth which sets like a wiggly Jell-O Jiggler when chilled. Once baked in a hot oven, the filling melts and gurgles inside its buttery shell, waiting to spurt out. The stew can be made with chicken, beef, or no meat at all; I’ve opted for the chicken version here, with all the traditional seasonings. The pastries get their signature flavor from a savory combination of oregano and aji panca (a mild, fruity Peruvian pepper) that complements the sweet crust. The stew is studded with peas and golden raisins, which plump with broth as they cook. Each salteña also has a surprise sliver of hard boiled egg and a black olive tucked into it before it's swaddled with pastry.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Making salteñas is a long, multistep process that might require you to clear out a weekend to tackle in stages. Luckily, once they're filled and formed, you can park them in your freezer, after which they require as much effort as a Hot Pocket to bake. Make enough (this recipe can easily be doubled or tripled) and you'll be reaping the rewards of your hard work for a long time to come.


   Step One: The Broth  

Broth is the foundation to a good salteña, so it’s important to start building flavor right from the start. Traditionally, beef marrow bones or chicken feet are slowly simmered to extract their collagen, which sets the filling into a gel. That said, you'll often find recipes that take a bit of a shortcut by combining boxed broth and powdered gelatin to recreate that long-cooked extraction. Because salteñas are already such a labor of love, I think it's worth it to put in the extra inactive time of making my own broth.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I reach for tried and true chicken wings for my broth. Daniel’s chicken stock testing has already revealed that wings have the best flavor-to-cost ratio. Chicken wings also offer up enough gelatin to set the broth, while being easier to track down than chicken feet. For a prominent chicken-forward flavor, I roast the wings in a hot oven before simmering them in water—the same method I used when creating my ultimate chicken noodle soup. Unroasted white chicken stocks are excellent chameleons that can sneak into a pan sauce for seared duck or stand-in for the beef broth in French onion soup, but chicken should take center stage in this recipe, and the browned flavors from roasting will help it get there.



To roast the wings, I spread them directly on an unlined roasting pan or rimmed baking sheet and pop them into a hot oven. Once golden brown, I pour off the rendered chicken fat and reserve it for cooking the stew. The area where each wing was in direct contact with the pan will develop a dark and crackly fond, which I deglaze with a splash of water and scrape up with a wooden spoon.



I simmer the wings, with just enough water to cover them, for about three and a half hours before adding the vegetables. (Alternatively, you can cook it in a pressure cooker for one and a half hours.) I add my vegetables toward the end because their flavor quickly grows muddy after about 30 minutes of simmering. Instead of the more common combo of carrots, onion, and celery, I finish the broth with red bell peppers, onion, and garlic to echo the Latin flavors of sofrito.



The strained broth should be reduced to just about five cups to ensure that the gelatin is concentrated enough to set. I find it’s easier to slightly over-reduce the stock and dilute it with water to achieve the correct volume—otherwise, you're stuck returning it to the pot to keep simmering it down after straining.


   Step Two: The Stew  

The filling will essentially be cooked twice—first as the stew simmers on the stovetop, and again as the pastry browns in a ripping hot oven. That’s why I like to use bone-in and skin-on thighs, which remain tender and juicy despite the double dose of heat. As a bonus, those bones also add even more collagen to the already rich broth.



I start by lightly seasoning chicken thighs with salt and searing them in the reserved chicken fat. I prefer to do this in a Dutch oven, which provides even heat and browning, but any heavy bottomed pot will work. Once the thighs are browned, I set them aside, pour off any excess fat, and add diced onion and minced garlic, cooking until they're translucent and tender. Next, I toss in the spices for a quick bloom in oil, followed by the chicken wing broth, diced potatoes, and raisins. After this mixture comes to a simmer, I return the thighs to the pot, cover, and gently simmer until the meat is cooked through.



I let the stew cool off for just a bit before getting handsy with the thighs. You may be tempted to remove the thighs from the stew to speed things up, but it’s always best to allow braised meat to cool in their cooking liquid to prevent them from drying out. I pick the meat from the bones and tear them into small bite-sized chunks, discarding the bones and skin, before stirring the meat back into the stew along with a handful of peas.



Finally, I transfer the mixture to a shallow dish to cool in the refrigerator. The stew needs to fully chill and set before it’s ready to wrap with pastry. When all's said and done, the stew will be stiff enough to slice.


   Step Three: The Dough  

The pastry for the salteñas needs to be heartier than your usual pie dough—capable of containing a whopping cupful of juicy filling without cracking or breaking—so it’s traditionally made with a hot water pastry for stability and strength. Using hot water in your crust causes the starch granules to quickly swell and drink in liquid while you’re mixing the dough, so it doesn’t sop up your broth later. It’s essentially like putting down a layer of shellac between the crust and the filling. Hot water also quickly develops gluten without kneading, giving us enough structure and elasticity to form the salteñas without turning the pastry tough or bready.



I start by melting butter with some annatto for color. The gentle warmth blooms the spice, giving the melted fat a deep sunset hue, which in turn saturates the dough for that trademark golden salteña glow. The addition of annatto is just for color—you can always leave it out or use a combination of paprika and turmeric in its place. After whisking the flour, salt, and sugar, I add the melted butter and mix it in thoroughly with my hands. Once fully incorporated, it will feel similar to streusel, holding together in large clumps when squeezed but easily crumbling back into wet sand. A small amount of boiling water helps it comes together into a smooth dough.



The final step here is to divide the dough into even portions, folding it onto itself until it forms a smooth ball. I pat the dough balls into disks to make them easier to roll out, and cover them with plastic until I’m ready to assemble.


   Step Four: Putting It Together  

I roll each disk of dough on a lightly floured surface into an eight-inch round (it should be just an eighth of an inch thick). Running an offset spatula underneath the dough will ensure it's not stuck to your countertop. Each disk gets a big scoop of chilled filling in the center of the dough, which I crown with a piece of hard boiled egg and two olive halves.



To seal the pastries, I start by brushing the edges of the dough with egg white. Then I lift the edges of the dough up and over the filling, pinching them closed to form a plump crescent with a seam running across the top. I finally crimp the seam shut to ensure that no filling escapes while baking.



I place the salteñas on a sheet tray and transfer them to the freezer to chill for at least an hour before baking, or until fully frozen for long term storage (you can bake them straight from the freezer when you're ready). For a shiny finish, I brush the pastries with egg white just before transferring them to a hot oven. You'll know they're ready when the crust is golden brown and the seam is crisp and blackened. You’ll be able to hear the filling rumbling on the inside; if your seam is tight, not a drop will have escaped.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



If you want to eat a salteña like a pro, hold it vertically and take a nibble off the top to open it up. This is the perfect opportunity to pour in some hot sauce if you want to perk up that rich stew. Then slurp and nibble until you’re through, pausing in between bites to cool down with the classic pairing of ice cold Coca Cola. You’re on your way to becoming a true Bolivian now!




April 2018




Recipe Details
Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe




Prep
50 mins




Cook
6 hrs




Active
3 hrs




Cooling Time
6 hrs




Total
12 hrs 50 mins






Serves
9 long salteñas




These traditional Bolivian pies are part empanada and part soup dumpling, featuring a buttery pastry crust filled with a saucy chicken stew.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Stock:


2 1/2 pounds (1.13kg) chicken wings


1/2 small onion (5.3 ounces; 150g), roughly chopped


2 cloves garlic (1/2 ounce; 12g), smashed


1 medium red bell pepper (8.2 ounces; 230g), roughly chopped


For the Stew:


2 tablespoons reserved chicken fat (1 ounce; 30g)


4 chicken thighs (about 1.8 pounds; 800g)


Kosher salt


1 medium onion (10.7 ounces; 300g), chopped into 1/4 inch dice


2 cloves garlic (1/2 ounce; 12g), minced finely


1 teaspoon aji panca powder (or 1/2 teaspoon cayenne), see note


1 teaspoon ground cumin


1/2 teaspoon hot paprika


1 tablespoon dried oregano


1/4 teaspoon black pepper


1 medium russet potato (5 ounces; 140g), peeled and chopped into 1/2-inch dice


1/2 cup golden raisins (3.2 ounces; 90g)


1/2 cup frozen peas (3.5 ounces; 100g)


For the Dough:


1 cup unsalted butter (8 ounces; 226g)


2 teaspoons annatto powder


3 3/4 cups all-purpose flour (1 pound; 454g)


2 teaspoons (0.5 ounce; 12g) Diamond crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same by weight


6 tablespoons sugar (2.7 ounces; 75g)


To Assemble:


3 large hard-boiled eggs, quartered


9 black olives, halved


1 egg white















Directions





For the stock: Preheat the oven to 500°F (260°C). Spread the chicken wings in a rimmed baking sheet and bake until deeply golden brown, about 40 minutes. Pour off any rendered chicken fat and reserve for cooking.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Transfer the wings from the roasting pan to a stock pot. Add 1 cup of water to the roasting pan and scrape up any brown bits with a wooden spoon. Pour the water and brown bits to a stockpot. Add enough water to cover the wings and simmer for 3 1/2 hours, adding more water if needed to keep chicken wings submerged. (Alternatively, simmer the wings in a pressure cooker at full pressure for 1 1/2 hours.)





Add the onion, garlic, and bell pepper to the stock and simmer an additional 30 minutes. Strain the stock and reduce further or add more water until the yield is 5 cups.





For the stew: Add the chicken fat to a 6-quart Dutch oven or similar heavy-bottomed, oven-safe pot and heat over medium-high until the fat shimmers. Season chicken thighs with salt and sear, skin side down, until golden brown, about 4 minutes. Flip chicken and sear on other side until browned, about 4 minutes longer. Transfer chicken to a plate and set aside. Drain any excess fat from pot and lower heat to medium.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add diced onion and minced garlic to pot and cook, scraping up any browned bits from the chicken, until translucent and tender, about 5 minutes. Add aji panca or cayenne, cumin, paprika, oregano, and black pepper and cook until fragrant, about 1 minute.





Increase heat to high, then add chicken wing stock, diced potato, and raisins and bring to a simmer. Season with salt. Return chicken thighs to pot along with any accumulated juices. Reduce heat to low. Cover and gently simmer until chicken has cooked through, about 30 minutes.





Remove the stew from heat and set aside until the chicken is cool enough to handle, about 1 hour (The chicken should be left to cool in the stew so that it doesn't dry out.) Using your hands, pick the meat from the chicken thighs and break into small pieces, discarding the skin and bones. Stir peas and picked chicken meat into the stew and refrigerate until the stew has solidified, about 4 hours, preferably overnight, and up to 3 days in advance.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






For the dough: In a 2-quart saucepan, combine butter and annatto and melt to infuse the butter with color.





In a large mixing bowl, whisk together the flour, salt, and sugar. Pour the melted butter into the flour mixture and, using your hands, mix until thoroughly combined and sandy. Add 3/4 cup (177mL) hot water to the flour mixture and mix until the dough comes together into a smooth ball.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Divide the dough into 9 equal portions (about 100 grams each). Fold each portion of dough onto itself until it becomes smooth and pat into a disk. Cover with plastic wrap.





Assembly: Work with one portion of dough at a time, keeping the remaining pieces covered. Lightly dust your work surface with flour. Using a rolling pin, roll out one portion of dough into an 8-inch round about 1/8-inch thick. Loosen the dough from the work surface with an offset spatula.





Add 1/9 (about 1 generous cup) of the chilled chicken stew to the center of the dough. Top it with a quarter of a hardboiled egg and two black olive halves. Brush the edges of the dough with egg white. Join the edges of the dough together over the filling. Press the edges together to encase the filling into a large football with a seam running across the top. Crimp the edges and transfer the salteña to a parchment-lined rimmed baking sheet. Repeat with the remaining dough and filling. Freeze the formed salteñas before baking at least 1 hour and up to 3 months in advance. (If freezing long-term, once the salteñas are fully frozen, wrap each in plastic and transfer to a zip lock freezer bag to prevent freezer burn.)











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Baking: If the salteñas have been frozen for only 1 hour, preheat your oven to 500°F (260°C). If the salteñas have been frozen solid for 4 hours or more, preheat your oven to 450°F (230°C). Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment and spray lightly with cooking spray. Line the tray with the frozen salteñas. (Do not bake on the chilled baking sheet the salteñas were frozen on or the bottom of the pastry will not brown.) Brush the pastries with egg white and bake until the seam is blackened and the crust is golden brown, 15-20 minutes. Serve immediately.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Rimmed baking sheet; stockpot or pressure cooker; Dutch oven; rolling pin; pastry brush


   Notes  

Aji panca is a mild chile native to Peru with flavors of raisin and smoke along with a gentle heat. It can be found in dried, powdered, frozen, or paste form, any of which can work in this recipe.


   Read More  

Galician Empanada With Tuna, Onion, and Green Bell Pepper Filling
Potato and Corn Empanadas With Aji
Beef Jerky Empanada
Sheng Jian Bao (Pan-Fried Pork Soup Dumplings)










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




638
Calories


31g 
Fat


65g 
Carbs


25g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 9




Amount per serving


Calories
638


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 31g
40%


Saturated Fat 16g
79%


Cholesterol 208mg
69%


Sodium 1068mg
46%


Total Carbohydrate 65g
24%


Dietary Fiber 4g
13%


Total Sugars 17g


Protein 25g




Vitamin C 7mg
33%


Calcium 73mg
6%


Iron 4mg
25%


Potassium 520mg
11%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















How to Make Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies) From Scratch





















How to Roast a Perfect Chicken





















Individual Double-Crusted Chicken Pot Pies





















The Ultimate Chicken Noodle Soup Recipe





















Pequenes (Chilean Onion Empanadas)





















Nigerian Meat Pie





















How to Make Turkey Stock





















Pressure Cooker Brown Chicken Stock Recipe


























Empanadas de Queso (Argentine Cheese Empanadas)





















Chicken and Leek Pie Recipe





















Easy One-Pot Chicken Tinga (Mexican Shredded Chicken Stew)





















Jamaican Brown Stew Chicken





















Basic Chicken Stock





















31 Quick Dinner Recipes for Your Instant Pot or Pressure Cooker





















Cioppino (San Francisco Seafood Stew)





















The Best Korean Fried Chicken






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



