












Grilled Oysters Are Better With Butter: How to Make the Best Barbecued Oysters
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 












 



































 












 



















 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Ingredients





Seafood





Oysters




Grilled Oysters Are Better With Butter: How to Make the Best Barbecued Oysters






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 10, 2018







































I am an oyster fiend. You may think that with my recent transplant to the West Coast, I'd be in oyster heaven right now, but there's a catch: I'm an Atlantic oyster fiend. Oyster experts may tell me that the smaller, creamier, more robustly flavored Pacific oyster is the true connoisseur's oyster. They'll say that Atlantic oysters taste mostly of salty brine, and have a thinner, more watery texture. Maybe they're right. But I'm an oyster fiend, not a connoisseur, and no matter how often I try a Pacific oyster (and, having worked as an oyster shucker in the past, I've tried many times), I just can't get past a flavor that, to me, tastes...off.












Photographs: J. Kenji López-Alt



So, when a buddy of mine recently gave me a whole case of gorgeous Kusshi oysters from British Columbia for helping him out with an oyster-shucking job, I immediately knew there was only one way I was going to be enjoying these deep-cupped beauties: on the grill.



Think of grilled oysters as a beginner's oyster dish. They've still got some oyster flavor, but there's plenty of other stuff going on to soften (or even enhance!) their peculiarities.













Grilled oysters weren't really a thing in the Northeast, where I grew up, but they're a staple in the Gulf and Pacific states. The basic premise is simple: Shuck oysters, place on the grill, add a sauce, and eat. The first time I had them was at a restaurant in Houma, Louisiana. I watched as the cook placed a half dozen deeply cupped oysters on top of a hot grill, then proceeded to ladle on butter that had been melted with garlic and roasted red peppers, letting the butter drip down into the flames to get just a bit of smoky, singed flavor into those oysters. They were flat-out delicious.



In California, I've seen oysters grilled with everything from barbecue sauce to cream and Champagne. I still prefer a simple compound butter, though, unless I'm planning on making a massive amount, I find it easier to just use softened butter instead of a tub of melted butter.













I start by shucking the oysters one at a time (see our photo guide to shucking oysters here, as well as the video below) and laying them out on a rimmed baking sheet that I've lined with a piece of crinkled aluminum foil. That's a little trick that'll help you keep wobbly oysters upright so that their liquid doesn't go spilling around everywhere. That liquid is important! It's what's going to combine with your butter later on to form a wonderfully briny sauce that the oysters will simmer in. But we'll get there.







1:58



How to Shuck an Oyster



I like to use a New Haven–style oyster knife, with its slightly curved tip to make popping the joint simpler. Daniel likes the straight, pointy blade of this oyster knife pictured. If you've never used either before, they'll both offer a bit of a learning curve, but there's no need to have more than one oyster knife in your kitchen, whichever shape you choose. Still, you can get one of each if you're really shellfish (oh, man, sorry about that one).













The first batch I grilled was with a classic compound butter, which has a French name that's so fancy that not just one but two different letters get to wear a little hat: beurre maître d'hôtel. Where I'm from, it's just plain old garlic-parsley butter. "Snail butter," perhaps, if you want to give it a bit more Continental context: It's got the same flavors you'd use to stuff broiled Burgundy snails, and it works amazingly well with almost any kind of grilled or broiled seafood, vegetable, or meat. (Get the recipe here.)



You can mash together softened butter with chopped parsley, garlic, and lemon juice in a bowl with a fork, but it's much easier to just do it in a food processor, where the butter will get softened and the herbs and garlic chopped all at the same time.













If you're cooking for a large group and want to streamline things a bit, it can help to top each oyster with a couple of teaspoons of the butter mixture before they go on the grill, so that everything is ready to go. If I'm just cooking for a small party, I don't bother with that step; instead, I'll place the oysters straight on the grill and spoon out a little butter into each one as they heat up.













The real key is to make sure you don't overcook them. Like clams or other shellfish, oysters can get a little rubbery if you let them cook too long. I grill mine, with the lid closed, just until the liquid inside is vigorously bubbling and the butter is completely melted, about 2 minutes. It's okay if the very tops of the oysters are still a touch raw. Better an undercooked, tender oyster than an overcooked tough one!


   Flavor Variations  

The fun thing about oysters with compound butter is that you can play with the flavors any way you wish. I wouldn't necessarily put blue cheese butter on an oyster, but anything with high acidity and bright, fresh flavors should work.



Kimchi butter couldn't be simpler: Combine chopped kimchi and butter. Ta-da! It's great on oysters, and also great stirred into noodle soups or melted on top of fried eggs or darkly charred grilled steak.













For a milder variation on garlic-parsley butter, I like to swap the parsley for basil and add a good amount of Parmesan. Garlic-Parmesan butter is especially good for broiled dishes, in which that Parmesan has a chance to brown and deepen in flavor a bit.













These are the kinds of dishes that can bring the East, the West, and the Southern coasts together. Now we gotta work on the middle of the country.



Grilled Oysters Recipe








Oysters





Snacks & Appetizers





Summer Snacks & Appetizers





Grilled Seafood

















































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Grilled Oysters Recipe





















How to Shuck an Oyster | Knife Skills





















24 Clam, Oyster, and Mussel Recipes for Shellfish Lovers





















A Guide to Clam Types and What to Do With Them





















New England Clam Chowder





















The Unitaskers That Belong in Your Kitchen





















Pan-Seared, Butter-Basted Thick-Cut Steak Recipe





















Ask a Chef: What's Your Favorite Way to Cook a Turkey?


























Crispy Baked Pasta With Mushrooms, Sausage, and Parmesan Cream Sauce Recipe





















Oysters Rockefeller Recipe





















Our Tips for Meal Planning During Self-Isolation





















You Asked The Food Lab 164 Questions. Here Are 164 Answers





















Oysters Oaxacafeller Recipe





















The Food Lab Answers All Your Thanksgiving Questions





















Pacific Razor Clams: How to Catch, Clean, and Cook Them





















We Shucked 150 Oysters to Find the Best Oyster Knives






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



