












Dairy-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Course





Desserts





Cakes




Dairy-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe
This simple, weeknight-friendly cake comes together fast—no fancy equipment required!






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated April 11, 2023
























































(10)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

Acidic ingredients, like coffee and brown sugar, activate the baking soda, giving the cake its rise.Dutch cocoa powder is dark and higher in fat than natural styles, making a rich and flavorful cake.Olive oil can provide the cake with a mild and buttery richness or a bolder pop of flavor, depending on the style.Whole wheat flour lends a subtle nuttiness to the cake, rounding out its flavor.


I don't think you can ever have too many recipes for chocolate cake, whether that's a Texas sheet cake made from natural cocoa or a double-dark devil's food made with both Dutch cocoa and a chocolate bar. There's a place for both in my heart, along with every style in between—including this supremely dark chocolate cake.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It contains a few "secret" ingredients—namely, extra-virgin olive oil and whole wheat flour. I know those must sound like alarmingly health-conscious choices for chocolate cake, but these ingredients are here for flavor alone; any dietary benefits are just a bonus.



This cake is a streamlined version of my aforementioned devil's food cake. While that recipe can be mixed up by hand in a single bowl, it requires heat to melt the dark chocolate and butter.



It's not a big deal, since I melt both in a big pot on the stove that then doubles as a mixing bowl. But switching to a nondairy formula and using Dutch cocoa powder alone make for an even easier technique.



Simplifying the ingredients simplifies the cake's flavor, too, eliminating the complexity that comes from a secondary source of chocolate, as well as the dairy solids in butter, which develop flavor as they bake and brown.



That's where those secret ingredients come in. Olive oil provides some of the fruitiness and astringency normally found in a good bar of dark chocolate, while whole wheat flour adds a subtle graham-like flavor to stand in for the toastiness of brown butter.



The result is a different sort of chocolate cake, to be sure, but one that still tastes classic overall, with a satisfying richness and depth.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Those who want a more traditional chocolate cake should stick to mild olive oils with a buttery profile, or the cheaper brands that a connoisseur would consider bland. They'll still have enough character to give the cake depth, but not enough to be distracting.



If, on the other hand, you're intrigued by the idea of a bolder olive oil presence, pick an oil that you love already, something sharp and peppery. Because the internal temperature of the cake will crest around a mere 200°F (93°C), the olive oil will retain much of its character in the finished cake. For more information, see our guide to olive oil.



Aside from nixing the chocolate bar and switching to olive oil and whole wheat flour, the cake differs from my devil's food by using whole eggs only, rather than a blend of whole eggs and yolks. The remaining ingredients—Dutch cocoa, brown sugar, baking soda, salt, black coffee, and vanilla—are the same, although the proportions have been slightly tweaked.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It's a perfect recipe for bakers who need to steer clear of dairy—or those who have found themselves suddenly fresh out of butter—as well as anyone looking to incorporate more whole wheat into their baking repertoire. It's also easy (and forgiving) enough for kids, should you have any desire to bring a little helper into the kitchen.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Start by whisking the brown sugar and Dutch cocoa together, along with the baking soda and salt, until well combined. It's not necessary to eliminate every last lump of brown sugar, but it is important for the salt and baking soda to be well distributed up front.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Next, add the eggs, vanilla, olive oil, and coffee all at once. Keep whisking until the batter is smooth, thick, and well emulsified, with no streaks of oil or egg white rising to the top.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Finally, add the whole wheat flour and whisk until it's well combined, with no pockets of unmixed flour lurking about.



Scrape the bowl with a flexible spatula, making sure to incorporate any bits of flour around the side, then pour the batter into a lightly greased and parchment-lined eight- by three-inch anodized aluminum cake pan.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It'll do just fine in an eight- by two-inch pan as well, if that's what you have on hand. The reduced height will lead to more doming, and, while that can be a problem for layer cakes, it's not a big deal in a single-layer snack cake.



Bake until the cake is puffed and firm to the touch, but still soft enough to retain an impression from being poked.



Let the cake cool completely in the pan, then loosen the edges with a butter knife and invert onto a plate, wire rack, or just the palm of your hand. After removing the cake from the pan, peel off the parchment and re-invert the cake onto a serving platter or cake stand so that it's right side up.



For a pop of contrast and a hint of sweetness, finish the cake with a dusting of powdered sugar. If you're feeling fancy, torn strips of parchment or even a wire rack can be placed over the cake as a simple stencil before you start dusting.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



If powdered sugar isn't normally your jam, consider switching to an organic, tapioca-based brand. Because it still contains a portion of its natural molasses content, this style tastes a little less sweet and a little more complex than traditional powdered sugar, with a less gritty consistency thanks to the tapioca starch. (For more info, read up on the differences between conventional and organic powdered sugar.)












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Thanks to the grassy aroma of olive oil, this cake has a lighter profile that also pairs well with fresh fruit, especially citrus and red fruits, like raspberries or cherries. But all of these are optional touches; the cake has plenty of flavor and natural sweetness to stand all on its own.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik




April 2019




Recipe Details
Dairy-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe




Prep
5 mins




Cook
25 mins




Active
About 5 mins




Cooling Time
60 mins




Total
90 mins






Serves
8 servings




Makes
1 cake




This simple, weeknight-friendly cake comes together fast—no fancy equipment required!


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




4 ounces light or dark brown sugar (about 1/2 cup, firmly packed; 115g)


1 1/2 ounces high-fat Dutch cocoa (about 1/2 cup; 42g); see our top Dutch cocoa picks for recommendations (see note)


Shy 1/2 teaspoon (1.75g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


3/4 teaspoon (4.8g) baking soda


4 1/2 ounces extra-virgin olive oil (about 2/3 cup; 127g)


4 ounces brewed black coffee, or black tea such as Assam (about 1/2 cup; 115g), any temperature


2 large eggs (about 3 1/2 ounces; 100g), straight from the fridge


1/4 ounce vanilla extract (about 1 1/2 teaspoons; 7g)


2 1/2 ounces whole wheat flour, such as Bob's Red Mill (about 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons; 70g)


Optional garnishes: powdered sugar, preferably organic (see our explainer on organic powdered sugar for more information), or fresh fruit















Directions





Getting Ready: Adjust oven rack to lower-middle position and preheat to 350°F (180°C). Line an 8- by 3-inch anodized aluminum cake pan with parchment (see our explanation and tutorial on how to cut a parchment round) and grease lightly with pan spray.





For the Cake: In a medium mixing bowl, combine brown sugar, Dutch cocoa powder, salt, and baking soda. Whisk until homogeneous, with no visible clumps of cocoa or baking soda (although a few lumps of brown sugar may remain), about 1 minute. Under-mixing will give the cake an uneven texture and rise, so don't rush this step.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Whisk in olive oil, brewed coffee, eggs, and vanilla. When mixture is smooth and well emulsified, add whole wheat flour and continue mixing only until combined. Scrape into prepared pan. Bake until cake is firm but your finger can still leave an impression in the puffy crust, about 25 minutes. (A toothpick inserted into the center should come away with a few crumbs still attached.)











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Cool cake directly in pan for 1 hour, then run a butter knife around the edges to loosen. Invert onto a wire rack, peel off parchment, and place cake right side up on a serving platter or cake stand. Serve plain, with a sprinkling of powdered sugar, or with fresh fruit.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik





   Special Equipment  

Whisk, 8- by 3-inch anodized aluminum cake pan


   Notes  

As the cake's chocolate flavor comes from Dutch cocoa powder alone, it's important to reach for a high-quality brand that's rich in cocoa butter. Steer clear of low-fat supermarket brands, or those that blend natural and Dutch styles.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

Wrapped tightly in plastic, the cake will keep for 2 or 3 days at cool room temperature.


   Read More  

Olive Oil Cake
Vegan Brownies






Cakes





Chocolate





Dairy-free





Dairy-free Desserts





Easter Desserts















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




275
Calories


18g 
Fat


26g 
Carbs


4g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8




Amount per serving


Calories
275


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 18g
23%


Saturated Fat 3g
13%


Cholesterol 47mg
16%


Sodium 225mg
10%


Total Carbohydrate 26g
9%


Dietary Fiber 2g
7%


Total Sugars 16g


Protein 4g




Vitamin C 0mg
0%


Calcium 23mg
2%


Iron 3mg
15%


Potassium 77mg
2%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Olive Oil Cake





















Chocolate Cherry Layer Cake Recipe





















Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















Bumpy Cake (Chocolate Cake with Vanilla Buttercream and Chocolate Fudge) Recipe





















23 Easy Cake Recipes That'll Make Every Day a Cake Day





















Devil's Food Cake Recipe | BraveTart





















Bibingka (Filipino Rice Cake)





















Essential Baking Ingredients for Cake, Cookies, Breads, and More


























Texas Sheet Cake Recipe





















What's the Difference Between Dutch Process and Natural Cocoa Powder?





















Chocolate Birthday Layer Cake





















Pistachio Cake Recipe





















Homemade Nutella (Creamy Chocolate-Hazelnut Spread) Recipe





















Old-Fashioned Jelly Roll





















Vegan Brownies Recipe





















Blackberry Cake With Cream Cheese Frosting Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



