












Homemade Sno Balls Recipe
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Desserts





Baking





Coconut








Homemade Sno Balls Recipe
These classic individual chocolate cakes are enrobed in marshmallow and coconut.






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated July 26, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Sarah Jane Webb

































Why It Works

For that classic pink appearance, shredded coconut is tinted pink while being ground in a food processor, which gives it the authentic fine texture of the original.To achieve the proper shape, the filled and coated sno balls are trimmed with a cookie cutter and more coconut is applied again.


If you've ever wanted to eat a Koosh Ball then you understand the appeal of Hostess Sno Balls. Who doesn't want a fluffy, jiggly, bouncy neon snack? Uh. Well. Maybe you don't. In which case, who wants chocolate cake?



We can all agree on chocolate cake.



On a technical level, Sno Balls are Hostess cupcakes turned upside down and coated in marshmallow, coconut, and dye. But that's a little like saying that Superman is just Clark Kent with a cape.



Underneath it all, yes, they may be the same. But the exterior of each dictates certain conventions or, in the case of the Sno Ball, confections. A Hostess Cupcake is solid, reliable, sweet, and a little dense, like Clark. But throw on a marshmallowy robe and that plain little chocolate cake transforms into something so much more...super.












Serious Eats / Sarah Jane Webb



Like Clark and Superman, the Sno Ball knows a thing or two about the power of disguise. Around St. Patrick's day, the Sno Ball goes green and masquerades as a Lucky Puff. For Easter, it's a violet Hopper and for Trick-or-Treat it becomes a Scary Cake.



Which is funny, because the Sno Ball is kind of a scary cake all year round. I don't want to be mean, but seriously, it belongs in the X-Files. Literally. Remember Scully's birthday and the sparkler-topped Sno Ball Mulder arranged for her?












Serious Eats / Sarah Jane Webb



Despite Hostess' past bankruptcy troubles and ensuing Twinkie panic, you can still pick up a two-pack of Sno Balls at the grocery. But, should a day come where they're no longer available and you find yourself in need of a birthday cake for the Scully in your life, I've got you covered.




March 2012




Recipe Details
Homemade Sno Balls Recipe




Active
70 mins




Total
4 hrs 20 mins






Serves
12 servings




These classic individual chocolate cakes are enrobed in marshmallow and coconut.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Cake: 


2 ounces unsalted butter (see note)


5 ounces sugar


1/4 teaspoon salt


1/2 teaspoon baking powder


1/2 teaspoon baking soda


1 egg


3 ounces all-purpose flour, sifted


1 ounce cocoa powder, sifted


5 ounces buttermilk


1 teaspoon vanilla extract


For the Marshmallow Coating: 


1/2 ounce gelatin


10 ounces water, divided


7 ounces corn syrup


18 ounces sugar


1/2 teaspoon salt


1 teaspoon vanilla extract


For the Cream Filling: 


6 ounces heavy whipping cream


For the Coconut Coating:


8 ounces unsweetened coconut flakes


Optional: food coloring















Directions





To Make the Chocolate Cake:  Preheat oven to 350°F (180°C) and have a cupcake pan, lightly greased, set aside (see note). With a hand or stand mixer, cream together butter, sugar, salt, baking powder, and baking soda until light and fluffy, about 3 minutes. Add egg and mix another minute more until fully incorporated. With the mixer set to low, add in flour all at once, followed by the cocoa powder. Finally, drizzle in buttermilk and vanilla. Continue mixing only until homogenous. Divide batter evenly between the cupcake cups and bake for about 12 minutes, or until puffed and set. Set aside and cool for at least 2 hours before filling.





To Make the Marshmallow Coating and Filling:  In a medium bowl (or the bowl of a stand mixer) combine gelatin with half the water (5 ounces). Mix with a fork to ensure no lumps of gelatin remain. Set aside. In a medium pot, combine remaining water, corn syrup, sugar, and salt over medium heat. Stir gently with spatula to ensure sugar dissolves; avoid splashing. Cook until the mixture registers 240°F (116°C) on a candy thermometer. When it does, immediately shut off the heat and cool to 210°F (99°C). Once cool, add sugar syrup to the gelatin mixture and whip on low speed until gelatin has fully dissolved. Increase speed to medium-high and whip until light, fluffy and tripled in bulk. While still mixing, add in vanilla. Use a spatula to transfer all but 4 ounces of the mixture to a pastry bag. Set the pastry bag aside.





Return remaining 4 ounces of fluff to the mixer and set speed to low. Add cream in all at once and continue mixing another minute—the fluff and cream will have a rather broken appearance. Increase speed to medium and continue whipping until they gradually become homogeneous. Once they have, increase speed to medium-high and beat until stiff. Transfer to piping bag fit with a star tip and set in the refrigerator until needed.





To Fill the Cupcakes: Release cupcakes from the pans and arrange, upside down, on a parchment-lined sheet pan. Use a paring knife to poke a hole into the bottom of each cupcake. Take piping bag with marshmallow whipped cream and insert the tip 1-inch into the cupcake (see note). Pipe about 3/4 ounce filling into each cupcake, about one good squeeze.





To Finish the Sno Balls: Take the bag of plain marshmallow whip and hold it directly above a cupcake. Pipe a generous blob on top of the cupcake, enough that it flows down the sides of the cupcake and completely encases it. Repeat until all remaining cupcakes have been covered.





Next, tint coconut (if making a white Sno Ball, grinding the coconut in a food processor is still preferable, but can be skipped if you don't mind the large coconut bits). To tint the coconut, pulse in a food processor, along with a bit of your food coloring of choice, until the color is evenly distributed and coconut has been ground into small bits (see note). Generously coat each marshmallow-covered cupcake in coconut and let stand for 1 hour. Save any extra coconut.





After an hour, use a large cookie cutter to trim away excess marshmallow from each Sno Ball. Use reserved coconut to coat newly exposed marshmallow edges. Serve immediately. Sno Balls are best consumed right away, but will keep for about a day.











Serious Eats / Sarah Jane Webb





   Special Equipment  

Cupcake pan, digital scale, stand mixer or hand mixer, two pastry bags, one large plain tip, one medium star tip, candy thermometer or leave-in probe thermometer, food processor


   Notes  

All measurements are in weights, as volume measures can be very imprecise. I strongly recommend using a digital scale for all pastry projects.



I recommend greasing the cupcake pan, rather than using cupcake papers, because the crinkled impressions the papers leave behind on the cupcakes create a strange exterior texture for the Sno Balls.



I like using a medium star tip to fill the cupcakes because its shape makes it easier to pierce the cupcake and inject the filling.



Instead of using a food processor, you can tint the coconut flakes by shaking them up with food coloring in a plastic bag. However, the coconut bits on a Sno Ball are quite small and using a food processor helps grind up the coconut for a more authentic texture.


   Read More  

DIY Donettes (Mini Sugar-Coated Doughnuts)
Homemade Star Crunch
Little Debbie-Style Christmas Tree Cakes
Homemade Oreo Cookies
Homemade Fig Newtons
Homemade 'Nutter Butters'
Homemade Milanos
E.L. Fudge-Style Chocolate and Vanilla Sandwich Cookies










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




519
Calories


22g 
Fat


80g 
Carbs


5g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 12




Amount per serving


Calories
519


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 22g
29%


Saturated Fat 17g
84%


Cholesterol 43mg
14%


Sodium 261mg
11%


Total Carbohydrate 80g
29%


Dietary Fiber 4g
13%


Total Sugars 69g


Protein 5g




Vitamin C 1mg
3%


Calcium 50mg
4%


Iron 2mg
11%


Potassium 153mg
3%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Homemade Mallomar Bars





















Homemade 'Nutter Butters' Recipe





















Homemade Strawberry Shortcake Ice Cream Bars Recipe





















Paris–Brest (Pâte à Choux With Praline Crème Mousseline) Recipe





















Choux au Craquelin Recipe





















The Essential Baking Tools You Should Have at Home, According to a Pastry Chef





















Bumpy Cake (Chocolate Cake with Vanilla Buttercream and Chocolate Fudge) Recipe





















Homemade Oreo Cookies Recipe | BraveTart


























Cream Puffs





















Fresh Basil Mousse Recipe





















Vanilla Ice Cream Sandwiches





















Sweet and Salty Stout Marshmallow Bars With Pretzels, Potato Chips, and Chocolate Recipe





















White Chocolate and Raspberry Frozen Mousse Bombes Recipe





















No-Bake Cheesecake With Freeze-Dried Fruit Recipe





















Homemade Klondike Bars Recipe





















Thick and Fluffy Pancakes From Homemade Pancake Mix Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



