












The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 4: Flap Meat (Sirloin Tip)






















































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Beef Guides





Grilling Guides








The Best Inexpensive Steak For The Grill Part 4: Flap Meat (Sirloin Tip)






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 29, 2019













Trending Videos














 






























I first knew flap meat by its local New England name of sirloin tip. Go to any old school dive or tavern with a menu, and you're bound to run into them, cut into cubes, stuck on a skewer, and grilled over an open coal fire, just like they do at Santarpio's over in East Boston. When grilled right, they're tender, juicy, takes on marinades extremely well, and have a robust beefy flavor that a lot of other cuts-for-kebabs lack. That and they're cheap. Not just "cheaper-than-tenderloin-but-still-kinda-expensive" cheap, but actually cheap.



It wasn't until I moved back to New York that I realized that nobody outside of New England knows what sirloin tip is, and it wasn't until even later that I realized that the "faux hanger" and "flap meat" that the butchers around here sell are in fact the exact same cut of beef, just left whole rather than sliced into tips.



Of all the inexpensive cuts of beef, it's one of the most versatile. It takes great to fast-cooking methods like grilling or searing. It's excellent cooked whole and sliced into thin strips. It can't be beat cubed and put on skewers. It has a coarse texture that grabs onto marinades and seasonings. It's even great as a slow-cooked braise, where if comes apart into tender shreds, like a Cuban ropa vieja.



Here's how to deal with it.


  Shopping  

Also Sold As: Faux hanger, bavette (France), sirloin tip (New England).













Where It's Cut From: The bottom sirloin butt—the same general region where the tri-tip comes from.



Flap meat comes in a few forms depending on where you live, but it's pretty much always delivered to the supermarket or butcher as a whole cut of meat, so if you live in an area where selling it in strips or cubes is the norm (such as in New England), instead ask the butcher to give you a whole trimmed flap steak. This gives you more options when you get it home.



As a relatively lean cut, there's not really any need to spring for Prime-graded flap steak. The Choice stuff will taste just as good and costs less.













More than any other cut I know of, flap meat is pretty terrible when it's cooked rare. You can feel it for yourself when it's still raw: this is some mushy-a*s meat. Only by cooking it to medium-rare or medium can you get it firm enough to not squish around in your mouth as you chew it.



Flap meat doesn't require the extreme heat of a skirt steak, and it doesn't have the fat flareup problems of a short rib, which make sit pretty simple to cook. Just build a hot fire (I use a single chimney), build it up on one side of the grill, the lay on the flap (after seasoning it, of course). Cook it by flipping every minute or so until it gets to at least 125°F at its thickest part



If it ever threatens to start burning on the exterior before the center is done, you can slide it on over to the cooler side of the grill for some more gently cooking. As with all meat, it benefits from a few minutes of resting before you slice into it.


  Slicing and Serving  











Flap meat has an extremely coarse grain with an obvious direction. It runs all the way down the steak crosswise. This makes it hard to cut against the grain into thin, bite-sized pieces (you'd end up with strips sliced lengthwise from the meat).



Instead, the best thing to do it first divide it into three or four pieces, slicing with the grain, then to rotate each of those pieces 90 degrees and slicing them thinly against the grain.













Since its shape, thickness, and proclivity for marinades makes it similar to flank steak, you can use it pretty much interchangeably. Think of it as flank steak's tastier, sexier cousin.


  Get The Recipes:  

Spice-Rubbed Grilled Flap Meat (Sirloin Tip)
Steakhouse-Style Grilled Marinated Flank Steak
Thai-Style Marinated Flank Steak and Herb Salad
Grilled Marinated Flank Steak Fajitas













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















The Food Lab's Definitive Guide to Grilled Steak





















The Food Lab's Guide to Inexpensive Steak for the Grill: 5 Cuts You Should Know





















How to Make Great Grilled Kebabs





















Homemade Tacos Al Pastor





















Chinese-American Beef and Broccoli With Oyster Sauce





















What Are the Best Cuts of Beef for Stew?





















Sous Vide Steak Guide | The Food Lab





















Grilled Marinated Flank Steak Fajitas


























Perfectly Grilled T-Bone Steak





















22 Grilled Beef Recipes for the Ultimate Memorial Day Cookout





















Thai Chicken Satay Recipe





















Chacarero Chileno (Chilean Steak and Bean Sandwiches) | The Food Lab





















The Best Inexpensive Steak for the Grill, Part 2: Skirt Steak





















The Ultimate Beef Stroganoff Recipe





















Spicy Grilled Jerk Chicken





















Rotisserie Boneless Leg of Lamb With Lemon, Rosemary, & Garlic Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



