












Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Savory





Feta Cheese





Chicken Breast





Chicken Thighs





Spinach








Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet Recipe
Traditional Greek flavors, using just one pan.






By

Morgan Eisenberg








 

Morgan Eisenberg




 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 



Morgan Eisenberg is a creative blogger at Host the Toast. She has an absolute obsession over all things edible.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated June 20, 2023

























































(14)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg

































In This Recipe


Expand





Turning Spanakopita into a One Skillet Dinner




How to Work with Phyllo Dough









Why It Works

Cooking the chicken in butter browns it quickly, keeping the interior juicy.Scrunching up the phyllo topping yields a great textured look, while also making the ultra-thin pastry easy to work with.


The first time I tasted spanakopita, I was 10 years old and eating at a buffet lined with trays of leathery mystery meats, swamped in gloppy, gray-brown sauces. I remember finally coming upon one dish that looked different, in a good way. The top, not yet cracked, was a sheet of flaky golden pastry, stretched atop what appeared to be a fresh-from-the-oven pot pie. I smiled as the server pressed a big spoon down into it, the pastry sheets softly crinkling as they shattered and separated. And then, in an instant, my smile collapsed under the weight of crushing disappointment as a spinach-loaded scoop was lifted out and heaved onto my plate. Luckily, that feeling didn't last long. After a very hesitant bite, I actually had a new favorite food.



I still love it today, but one thing I don't love is how much time and effort it takes to make, especially considering that it's generally eaten as an appetizer or snack. In my ideal world, I'd be able to regularly cook and eat spanakopita on a weeknight and let that be dinner, but in its traditional form, it just doesn't lend itself to that purpose. With a few simple tweaks, though, it's entirely possible. And with that, I'd like to introduce you to the creamy, garlicky chicken spanakopita skillet.


   Turning Spanakopita into a One Skillet Dinner  

Spanakopita is typically made in a rectangular baking dish with a filling of spinach, feta cheese, scallions or onions, eggs, and dill, covered with several layered sheets of butter- or oil-brushed phyllo dough. This riff, however, is cooked entirely in a cast iron skillet, with a whole lot less mess and fuss. It merges the Greek classic with elements of chicken pot pie, delivering a creamier, heartier, dinner-worthy recipe.












Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg



Just like the old tried-and-true spanakopita, this dish begins with a hefty helping of spinach. I wilt it in my skillet so that it releases its water, which would otherwise leach out during baking. Then I transfer it to a colander and gently press to rid it of any excess liquid, making sure to get as much out as possible (lest the saucy spanakopita end up more like a strange spinach-flavored soup).



Next, I pan-fry chunks of chicken in butter until the outer edges turn golden. The browning of the milk solids in the butter speeds up browning on the chicken, and the less time it takes to brown the exterior of the chicken, the juicier the meat will remain on the inside. I set the chicken aside, then turn to the sauce.



I start with a garlic-spiked roux—butter and flour cooked together—and then add cream and chicken stock. As it is, this sauce is a much more garlicky version of what you'd expect when you make a chicken pot pie. However, the recipe is still missing some essential spanakopita ingredients: feta, dill, and green onion. I mix in a generous amount of each and stir until no large chunks of feta remain.



Feta doesn't have the melting properties of other cheeses, but when it's combined with the liquids in the sauce, the extra moisture is enough to break down the cheese and distribute it throughout. The flour from the roux, meanwhile, helps emulsify the mixture, so that you get a tangy feta- and garlic-flavored sauce that won't separate, even after you add the chicken back along with the moist spinach.


   How to Work with Phyllo Dough  

Once the spinach, chicken, and feta-garlic sauce have been tackled, the only thing left to do before baking is add the much-loved and much-dreaded phyllo top. My biggest issue with phyllo dough is that it's so thin and fragile that it often tears when handled, making it difficult to work with. Knowing that sometimes the best way to deal with a fussy ingredient is to work with it rather than against it, I crinkle up the sheets of butter-brushed phyllo like tissue paper and place them over the filling, creating a textured, elevated top in which any tears are camouflaged by the many folds and exposed edges.












Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg



After baking, it's ready to scoop into big spoonfuls on your plate, with the creamy spinach and chicken filling sending steam up and over the phyllo.



It's a funny thing: When I first met spanakopita, I was hoping it was chicken pot pie, but I fell in love with what it actually was instead. Today, with this one-skillet creation, I get both at once. My 10-year-old self would be jealous.












Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg




November 2015




Recipe Details
Creamy Garlic Chicken Spanakopita Skillet Recipe




Active
40 mins




Total
60 mins






Serves
6
to 8 servings




Traditional Greek flavors, using just one pan.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 pound fresh baby spinach leaves, washed


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, divided


1 1/2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts or thighs, chopped into 1-inch chunks


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


5 medium cloves garlic, minced


2 tablespoons all-purpose flour


1/2 cup homemade chicken stock or low-sodium broth, plus more as needed


1/2 cup half-and-half


6 ounces feta cheese, crumbled


3 scallions, white and light green parts only, chopped


1 small bunch dill, chopped, plus more for garnish


6 to 8 sheets phyllo dough, thawed and covered with a towel















Directions





Heat a large cast iron skillet over medium heat. Add spinach, a handful at a time, until the pan is full; you may have to cook the spinach in batches to ensure that it cooks evenly. Turn the spinach often until just wilted, then transfer to a colander and press out as much water as you can. Continue until all of the spinach is wilted and pressed.











Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg






Pour off any excess water in the skillet and place back over medium heat. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in the pan and add chicken. Season with salt and pepper. Cook, turning once, until the edges are lightly golden, about 4 minutes. Remove from heat and set aside.





Preheat oven to 425°F (220°C). Melt 2 tablespoons butter in same skillet and add garlic. Cook until fragrant, about 1 minute, then mix in flour. Stir together until the mixture forms a golden paste. Whisk in 1/2 cup chicken stock. Cook, stirring often, until mixture is thickened and coats the back of a spoon. Whisk in half-and-half.





Stir together feta cheese, scallions, and dill, allowing the feta to melt. Remove from heat. Return chicken and spinach to skillet, mixing well. If the sauce has thickened too much, add more chicken stock to reach the desired consistency, keeping in mind that the mixture will thicken even more when baking in the oven. Season with salt and pepper.











Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg






Melt the remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a small saucepan or in the microwave. Lay a sheet of phyllo on a work surface. Brush with melted butter, then scrunch up the sheet and set it on top of the spinach mixture in the skillet. Repeat with remaining phyllo until the skillet is completely covered.











Serious Eats / Morgan Eisenberg






Bake until phyllo is golden and crisp on top, about 20 minutes. Remove from oven, garnish with additional dill, and serve warm.




   Special Equipment  

Cast iron skillet, pastry brush










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




361
Calories


19g 
Fat


14g 
Carbs


33g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
361


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 19g
24%


Saturated Fat 11g
54%


Cholesterol 119mg
40%


Sodium 584mg
25%


Total Carbohydrate 14g
5%


Dietary Fiber 2g
6%


Total Sugars 2g


Protein 33g




Vitamin C 18mg
91%


Calcium 204mg
16%


Iron 3mg
18%


Potassium 622mg
13%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Spanakopita (Greek Savory Greens Pie) Recipe





















16 One-Pot Chicken Recipes for Easy, Breezy Weeknight Dinners





















One-Skillet Dinner: Chicken Spanakopita Pot Pie





















Chicken Pot Pie With Buttermilk Biscuit Topping Recipe





















Quick and Easy Chicken Cutlets with Pan Sauce





















Salteñas (Bolivian Hand Pies Filled With Chicken Stew) Recipe





















Maryland Fried Chicken With White Gravy Recipe





















Easy Pressure Cooker Chicken and Chickpea Masala Recipe


























35 Super-Rich Recipes to Ruin Your New Year's Diet





















31 Breakfast Recipes for a Hungry Holiday Crowd





















Light and Fluffy Biscuits Recipe





















Fish Piccata





















The Ultimate Beef Stroganoff Recipe





















Classic Lasagna Bolognese





















Chocolate Skillet Cake With Milk Chocolate Frosting Recipe





















Swedish Meatballs With Rich Gravy






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



