












Sous Vide Pork Belly Buns With Pork Braise Mayonnaise and Quick-Pickled Cucumbers Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Pork Belly





Chinese





Sous Vide Pork





Snacks & Appetizers








Sous Vide Pork Belly Buns With Mayonnaise and Quick-Pickled Cucumbers
Where soft, buttery pork meets sweet, meaty mayo (!). 






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated September 07, 2023

























































(6)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt

































In This Recipe


Expand





Why Sous Vide Your Pork Belly?




How to Make the Marinade




The Best Way to Seal Your Vacuum Bag




Sous Vide Temperature Options




How to Make the Pork Braise Mayonnaise




Finishing Your Pork Belly Under the Broiler




Why to Use Store-Bought Buns




How to Make Quick Pickles









Why It Works

A 10-hour sous vide cook leaves gives the pork a soft, buttery texture with a bit of chew. The reduced cooking liquid provides a flavorful base for a sandwich spread. A brief pass under the broiler gives the pork a crisp texture.


Thick-cut braised-then-crisped pork belly is one of the easiest things in the world to cook. Seriously. You could throw the pot of it in a low oven, leave, find all 96 stars in Super Mario World, head out to a Star Wars marathon—including the episodes-that-shall-not-be-named—come back, and you'd still be able to take a bath before dinner and have something juicy and delicious waiting for you. Ok, that's probably not true, but what is true is that just about the only really terrible thing you could do to a slab of pork belly is to undercook it.


   Why Sous Vide?  

So why, you might ask, would one resort to cooking something so fool-proof using a newfangled method like sous-vide?



Two reasons. First, sous-vide ain't so newfangled. Where'd you get that idea? These days, sous-vide equipment is cheap, reliable, and increasingly becoming a staple in the modern kitchen (give it five years—mark my words). Second, if pork belly cooked through regular means is regular Mario, pork belly cooked sous-vide is Mario with a fire flower and an invincibility star. If regular pork belly is a hot dog, then pork belly sous-vide is a million hot dogs. If regular pork belly is you thinking you're clever for propping up the wobbly table with a folded coaster, then pork belly sous-vide is MacGyver building a bomb out of a tuna fish sandwich and a bobby pin.



I know people have a thing against using the word unctuous to describe food, but that's what pork belly cooked sous-vide is. It starts out as a solid slab of meat; then, when it hits your tongue, it melts into a creamy, tongue-coating wash of pork fat. It's not food for the faint of heart. Cram it into a soft-steamed Chinese-style bun with a few carefully concocted condiments, and you've hit on one of the greatest appetizers ever conceived.



Here's how I like to do mine.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt


   Making the Marinade  

I use a very basic Japanese-style braising liquid for my pork belly—similar to what you'd find in the classic simmered pork belly dish buta no kakuni. At its base are soy sauce, mirin, and sugar, all in equal volumes. To up the umami factor and bring out the meatiness of my pork, I also add a quarter part of fish sauce.



Typically, for kakuni you'd need a fair amount of liquid. With the sous-vide approach, you only need a little, since it all gets pressed around the pork in the vacuum-sealed bag.



For aromatics, I stick with the holy East Asian trinity of ginger, scallions, and garlic. Everything gets whirled together in the food processor.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt


   Sealing the Vacuum Bag  

Pro-tip: When putting moist items into a vacuum sealer-type bag, fold back the top lip over your hand so that it stays clean. This will help you get a better seal down the line. For the pork belly itself, you can use one giant slab, or, if you can't find one, use a couple of thinner slabs like I did here. No matter what, you want to go at least an inch or two thick.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



Food Saver-style sealers aren't fantastic at sealing moist items, as the liquid tends to seep up into the machine. There are a few solutions to this. Some folks advocate freezing your liquid into small cubes or flat sheets before bagging them. I find it easier to just work over the edge of a counter, letting the bag hang down out of the sealing device (make sure you support it!) so that all of the air rises to the top naturally. As soon as the air is sucked out and the liquid starts to get squeezed, hit the seal button and you should get a nice, air-free bag with very little liquid leakage into the machine's liquid trap.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



Use a paper towel to wipe out and liquid that might have escaped (you don't want this gunking up your circulator).












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



Then, press the belly to make sure that it's evenly coated on all sides with the marinade.


   Temperature Options  

There's more than one way to cook pork belly in a sous-vide machine, and to decide on how to do it, you've got to understand the relationship between temperature and time.



For cuts with lots of fat and connective tissue like pork belly or, say, short ribs or spare ribs, the goal is to get all of that tough connective tissue (mostly collagen) to convert into rich, sticky gelatin, forcing the meat into tender submission.



With traditional cooking methods like braising, slow-roasting, or confit, you don't have great control over temperature. Usually, you end up having to do it hotter than is ideal. At higher temperatures, connective tissues break down faster, but you also end up forcing muscles to squeeze out more liquid.



With sous-vide, you get the best of both worlds—the control to be able to tenderize connective tissue without having to get so hot that your meat dries out.



Some folks advocate ridiculously low temperatures and long time combinations—72 hours at 150°F (66°C). With pork belly, this can be a little overwhelming—you have to really love gelatinous meat to enjoy the texture. Sometimes I do. I advocate a 155°F 36-hour cook for my Deep-Fried, Sous-Vide, All-Belly Porchetta.



But in this case, I'm going with the more reasonable 170°F (77°C), 10 hour combination. This makes it just right for setting up in the morning and taking out when you get home from work, or setting up in the evening and removing when you wake up in the morning. It also gives you pork that's plenty tender and moist, but with a slightly more "traditional" texture.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



When it comes out, chill it so that you can easily remove the hardened fat. At this stage, you can leave it in its bag in the refrigerator for weeks—it's all sterile inside from that long, slow cook!



If all went well, the cold meat should have a soft, almost buttery texture when you slice it into chunks for broiling.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt


   The Pork Braise Mayonnaise  

And what about all that extra liquid in the bag? Surely we're not going to throw it away, are we? Not only does it have all the flavor of the original marinade, but it picked up plenty of pork juices during its cook as well. No point in wasting it.



Instead, I incorporate it into a sauce by first straining it, then reducing it on the stovetop into a thick syrup. Just be careful not to burn it—all that sugar and the pork proteins are inclined to stick to the bottom of the pan.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



Once it's reduced, I stir it into some homemade mayonnaise.



I've been trying to come up with a name for this rich, sweet, intensely meaty stuff. Pork braise mayo is appropriate, but not quite it enough. Meat-tastic Porkalicious More-Than-Mayo Magic Spread perhaps? I'll take suggestions if you've got 'em.


   Finishing Under the Broiler  

As with all things sous-vide, the pork has no real texture other than soft when it emerges from the cooker. To add that, along with a bit of browned and caramelized flavors, I turn to the broiler. The slices of pork belly take just a few minutes to crisp up.



Fair warning: once it gets sizzling, that pork belly is going to spit more than Alice Waters at a Monsanto party, so be careful when you retrieve it. Wear an apron, perhaps some safety goggles, and stand back until it cools slightly.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt


   Sometimes Store-Bought Is Best  

I would offer you my recipe for homemade steamed buns, but frankly, my recipe stinks. The ones you can buy at the Asian grocery store in the refrigerated or frozen sections are vastly superior, especially when you reheat them in a real bamboo steamer. Like Martin's Potato Rolls, ramen noodles, and sensual massage, some things are just better left to the professionals. For now.


   Quick Pickles  

Pickles, on the other hand, are something you can make better than store-bought at home. Much, much better. For applications like this, I like to use a quick, 15-minute pickle like these ones here. They retain a bit of fresh bite and more of their crisp, light, cucumber flavor. Rice vinegar and sugar add just a touch of acidity and sweetness to them.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt



The lettuce is not particularly necessary for flavor, but I do like to add it in order to cradle the pork and prevent it from completely saturating the bun in the fat that will start to drip out as you bite into these. And you will bite into these. Again and again and again.




Recipe Details
Sous Vide Pork Belly Buns With Mayonnaise and Quick-Pickled Cucumbers




Prep
10 mins




Cook
10 hrs 30 mins




Active
30 mins




Total
10 hrs 40 mins






Serves
8
to 12 servings




Where soft, buttery pork meets sweet, meaty mayo (!). 


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1/2 cup soy sauce


1/2 cup mirin


1/2 cup granulated sugar


2 tablespoons fish sauce


2 whole scallions, roughly chopped


3 medium cloves garlic, roughly chopped


1 (2-inch) chunk ginger, peeled and roughly chopped


2 1/2 pounds pork belly, in as large pieces as possible (preferably 1 or 2 whole slabs)


2/3 cup mayonnaise, preferably homemade


24 fresh or frozen Chinese-style steamed buns


1 head bibb lettuce, washed, dried, and torn into medium-sized pieces


1 recipe Quick-Pickled Cucumbers with Rice Vinegar















Directions





Preheat a sous-vide style water bath to 170°F (77°C). Combine soy sauce, mirin, sugar, fish sauce, scallions, garlic, and ginger in the bowl of a food processor. Process until vegetables are roughly pureed. Transfer pork belly and marinade to a food-saver style vacuum bag and seal. Alternatively, transfer to a heavy duty gallon-sized freezer bag and seal by slowly submerging into a pot full of water, sealing the top just before it goes underwater to remove all air. Transfer to sous vide cooker and cook until completely tender, about 10 hours. Remove bag from cooker and chill thoroughly. Pork belly can be stored in the refrigerator for up to 2 weeks after cooking if the bag remains sealed.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt






When ready to serve, open sous vide bag and remove pork belly. Discard solid chunks of fat. Warm congealed liquids in a small saucepan, then strain through a fine mesh strainer. Return to saucepan and simmer until reduced to 2 tablespoons, making sure that the syrup doesn't reduce too far and burn, about 15 minutes.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt






Transfer reduced cooking liquid to a medium bowl. Add mayonnaise and whisk to combine.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt






Preheat broiler to high. Cut pork belly into 1 1/2-inch wide strips, then slice into 1/2- to 1/3-inch slices. Transfer to a foil lined broiler pan. Broil pork belly until crisp and charred on one side, about 3 minutes.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt






To Serve: Steam buns in a bamboo steamer or in the microwave on a large plate under a damp towel. Spread mayonnaise onto each bun, then stuff with lettuce leaf, slices of pork belly, and pickles. Serve immediately.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji Lopez-Alt





   Special Equipment  

Sous-vide cooker, vacuum sealer, food processor










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




689
Calories


33g 
Fat


62g 
Carbs


32g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8
to 12




Amount per serving


Calories
689


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 33g
43%


Saturated Fat 10g
48%


Cholesterol 85mg
28%


Sodium 1698mg
74%


Total Carbohydrate 62g
23%


Dietary Fiber 3g
10%


Total Sugars 20g


Protein 32g




Vitamin C 6mg
30%


Calcium 238mg
18%


Iron 5mg
26%


Potassium 500mg
11%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Sous Vide Pork Chops Recipe





















Pork Belly Buns with Spicy Mayo, Scallions, and Pickled Bean Sprouts Recipe





















Sous Vide Barbecue Pork Ribs Recipe





















Sous Vide Carnitas for Tacos (Crispy Mexican-Style Pulled Pork) Recipe





















Crispy Sous Vide Chicken Thighs With Mustard-Wine Pan Sauce Recipe





















Butter-Basted Sous Vide Halibut Recipe





















Bang Bang Ji Si (Hot and Numbing Sichuan Chicken Salad)





















We Tested 20 Vacuum Sealers—Here Are the Best Ones


























Pressure Cooker Pork Belly Chashu Recipe





















Sous Vide Steak Guide | The Food Lab





















The Ultimate Chicken Noodle Soup Recipe





















Homemade Tacos Al Pastor





















Perfect Pan-Seared Pork Chops





















The Food Lab's Complete Guide to Sous Vide Chicken Breast





















The Guide to Sous Vide Eggs





















Sous Vide Duck Confit Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



