












Koji Prime Rib Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Beef Mains





Beef





Roasted Beef





Thanksgiving Dinner





Christmas Dinners








Koji Prime Rib
For the ultimate prime rib, slather it with shio koji before cooking for an intensely savory and tender holiday roast.






By

Sasha Marx








 

Sasha Marx




 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Editor

Sasha is a senior culinary editor at Serious Eats. He has over a decade of professional cooking experience, having worked his way up through a number of highly regarded and award-winning restaurant kitchens, followed by years spent in test kitchens for food publications.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 04, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































In This Recipe


Expand





The Ins and Outs of Koji Prime Rib




Render and Save Your Beef Fat









Why It Works

Separating the roast from the rib bones prior to cooking allows for more even seasoning of the meat and easier carving at the end. Tying the roast back onto the bones for cooking helps insulate the meat, keeping it moist while promoting even cooking.Slathering the roast with funky shio koji amplifies the beefy flavor of prime rib, imparting savory depth to the meat, while also tenderizing it. The sugars in the shio koji also help the prime rib achieve a well-browned crust.Slow-roasting in a low oven cooks the prime rib evenly from edge to edge.


Prime rib is an iconic holiday centerpiece that doesn't need much gussying up; the beauty of a beef roast lies in its simplicity. Here at Serious Eats, Kenji has covered this cut exhaustively, making it so that nobody should feel intimidated by the prospect of cooking this very expensive piece of beef. But that doesn't mean there isn't room to give a rib roast a helping hand, so that it achieves its full flavor potential.



This year, we wanted to try something new with prime rib, to up the ante on its rich, beefy, savory flavor. So I turned to one of the best flavor amplifiers I know, shio koji, to make the ultimate holiday roast: koji prime rib.



Shio koji is a Japanese marinade, commonly used with poultry, meat, and seafood, that taps into the flavor potential of Aspergillus oryzae (aka koji-kin or just "koji" if you're already on a first-name basis), the mold that also gives us miso, soy sauce, and sake. Shio koji is made by fermenting a mixture of grain koji (cooked grain, most commonly rice, that has been inoculated with koji spores and then dried), salt, and water to create a porridge-textured product with a sweet, funky aroma.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



This koji prime rib is the most savory, meaty, juicy, and delicious beef roast that I've ever cooked. And it's so easy to make. So if you're looking to get wild this holiday season, do yourself a favor—stop reading this, and go start a batch of funky, salty-sweet shio koji right now (if you don't have some in the works already).


   The Ins and Outs of Koji Prime Rib  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



The process for making koji prime rib is almost identical to the oven reverse-sear method that Kenji uses in his primer for perfect prime rib. While we don't need to rehash each step in minute detail, it's worth going over the basics, as my iteration has a few little tweaks and innovations of its own.


  Take Roast Apart, Slather It With Shio Koji, Tie It Back Together  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



First and foremost, a roast needs to be seasoned before cooking. I recently wrote a guide to our favorite method for seasoning both large and small cuts of beef, the dry brine. The TLDR version of that article is "season the meat with salt, let it rest, cook it." For large roasts like pork shoulder and prime rib, you'll achieve the best results by seasoning a day ahead of cooking, then allowing the roast to rest, uncovered in the fridge, overnight. Dry-brining produces well-seasoned meat that browns beautifully while holding onto its juices.



For this recipe, I took the same principles of dry-brining and replaced the salt with shio koji. Shio koji is plenty salty ("shio" is Japanese for "salt" after all), but as with other koji-derived ingredients like soy sauce and miso, it doesn't just provide salinity; it lends savory depth to foods that it comes into contact with, thanks to protease enzymes that break down proteins into amino acids, which we perceive as umami. This enzymatic activity not only boosts flavor but also has a textural effect on ingredients, making meat and poultry incredibly juicy and tender.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



In order to maximize the effect of shio koji on the prime rib, I start by separating the roast from the rib bones, which increases the surface area on which to rub the shio koji by exposing the interface between the meat and bones. Along with providing more even seasoning, cutting the roast off the bone and tying the two pieces back together before cooking makes carving much easier later.



As Kenji notes in his guide to prime rib, "The best way to cook your beef is to detach the bone and tie it back on. You get the same cooking quality of a completely intact roast, with the advantage that once it's cooked, carving is as simple as cutting the string, removing the bones, and slicing." Why keep the bones at all? Because they help insulate the meat, promote even cooking, and are also delicious to gnaw on at the table!












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



So slather up a prime rib with shio koji (you can blend shio koji until smooth if you'd like, but it's not necessary for this application, as it will still adhere to the meat just fine in its porridge-like state), before tying it back to its rib bones with butcher's twine.


  Overnight Rest  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



With the seasoning and trussing taken care of, it's time to let the roast rest, uncovered, on a wire rack–lined sheet tray in the fridge overnight. This gives enough time for the shio koji to do its thing. When you pull it out the next day, you'll notice how dry the surface of the roast has become—this, along with the sugars in the shio koji, will make for a deeply browned crust at the end of the roasting process.



Before popping the prime rib in the oven, I use a paper towel to lightly brush any excess bits of rice from the surface of the meat. There's no need to obsess over it by removing every last grain; just get any that stick out. Those pieces can easily burn when the prime rib gets its high heat blast at the end, and we don't want that. (This isn't an issue if you blend the mixture first, which is one small argument in favor of doing it.)


  Slow-Roast for Even Cooking  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



The roasting process follows our standard low-and-slow reverse-sear method. Cooking the roast at a low temperature allows us to achieve beautiful rosy meat from edge to edge.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Depending on how low a temperature your oven can go, along with how well-done you like your prime rib cooked (I'm with Daniel, who favors prime rib cooked closer to medium than mid-rare; with so much interior real estate in a prime rib, I don't love chewing on thick bites of medium-rare beef with no crust to break up the textural monotony), the roast will take four to five hours to cook.


  Blast It for a Browned, Crispy Crust  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Get the roast out of the oven and make a little foil fort for it while it rests. While it hangs out, turn the heat all the way up on your oven to give it a final blast for crispy, crusty, koji perfection. As I mentioned earlier, the sugars in the shio koji will accelerate browning, so keep an eye on the roast once it goes in the oven for this final step.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Also, once the roast comes out of the oven and moves to your carving board, don't forget to save the jelly-like beef juices that will have dripped down onto the foil-lined baking sheet. That's the good stuff! Spread it on bread, eat it with a spoon, fold it into a sauce. Just don't let it go to waste.


  Untie and Slice  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Having already separated the meat off the rib bones before roasting, carving is a breeze. Just snip away the butcher's twine to release the roast from the bones once more.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Cut between the bones to separate them into gnawable individual pieces, and start slicing up that juicy beef. Whatever you do, promise me you won't throw out any delicious (and expensive) prime rib fat, even if you're not planning on serving or eating all of it. I'll show you what to do with it in just a moment.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



But first, let's take a moment to appreciate the finished koji prime rib. It's beautiful to look at, sure, but just wait until you take that first bite. It's hard to describe what the flavor is, if not simply "extra." The koji amplifies the already pronounced beefy flavor of prime rib, while also lending a very subtle sweetness to the meat.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It's intensely savory, and impossible to stop snacking on. When I cooked the roast for these photos in the Serious Eats test kitchen, there were at least five people milling around, waiting for their time to pounce and snack, who then found they couldn't tear themselves away. Between mouthfuls, Daniel kept reminding himself out loud how he usually isn't a big fan of prime rib. And then he would grab another bite. This prime rib is different, in the best way.



And if you’re already going over the top with this prime rib, why not accompany it with an equally luxe shio koji-spiked jus?


   Render and Save Your Beef Fat  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



If you've bought a prime rib roast before, you're well aware that they don't come cheap. So if you are tempted to throw out any scraps of meat and fat that crop up when cutting the loin off the ribs, or any of the fat from the finished roast, then understand that you are throwing money—and flavor—away. (This applies to all food waste of course.)



That fat is delicious, especially if you sprung for a dry-aged piece of beef. It's your duty to put it to good use! The simplest way to process any scraps of fat is to render them in a saucepan with woodsy aromatics like rosemary and thyme. That rendered fat is gold. Strain it and keep it in the fridge, deploying it whenever you want to give a meaty boost to cooking projects.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



In recent weeks, I've been using my rendered dry-aged beef fat for simple pleasures like dipping crusty bread but also for cooking. The past two dinner parties I've hosted at home have featured a dish of young carrots roasted in dry-aged beef fat with an herby tahini sauce. They're pretty phenomenal, and I've gotten a couple of messages from friends asking for the recipe. I plan to write it up soon, but for now this koji rib roast will have to tide them over.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik




December 2019




Recipe Details
Koji Prime Rib




Active
15 mins




Total
17 hrs






Serves
6
to 12 servings




For the ultimate prime rib, slather it with shio koji before cooking for an intensely savory and tender holiday roast.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 standing rib roast (prime rib), 7 to 12 pounds (3.2 to 5.4kg; see notes)


1 cup (300g; 240ml) shio koji (see notes)


Freshly ground black pepper


For Serving:


Koji beef jus (optional)















Directions





For the Prime Rib (the day before roasting): Using a sharp knife, cut meat away from bone in one piece, cutting as close to the bone as possible, leaving you with a boneless roast and a slab of rib bones; reserve rib bones. Pat roast dry with paper towels; then using your hands, slather shio koji over entire surface of the roast and rib bones. Place roast back on bones, and, using butcher's twine, tie together so that roast looks as it did before meat was removed from the bones. Transfer roast, fat cap side up, to a wire rack set in a foil-lined rimmed baking sheet, then refrigerate, uncovered, at least 12 hours and up to 24 hours.















When Ready to Cook: Adjust oven rack to center position and preheat oven to 225°F (110°C). Using a paper towel, gently wipe away excess bits of shio koji from the fat cap side of the roast. Transfer baking sheet with rack and roast to oven and cook until internal temperature registers 125°F (52°C) on an instant-read thermometer at the roast's thickest point for medium-rare or 135°F (57°C) for medium, 4 to 5 hours.















Remove roast from oven, tent loosely with foil, and let rest at room temperature for at least 30 minutes and up to 1 1/2 hours. Meanwhile, increase oven temperature to 500°F (260°C) or highest possible temperature.





Ten minutes before guests are ready to be served, remove foil, place roast back in hot oven, and cook until deeply browned and crisp on the exterior, 6 to 10 minutes. Remove from oven, and transfer roast to a carving board.















For Serving: Cut away twine, and separate roast from ribs. Using a sharp knife, cut between ribs to separate into individual pieces, and then slice roast into 3/4-inch-thick slices. Serve right away, passing coarse sea salt and koji beef jus (if using) at the table.














   Special Equipment  

Butcher's twine, rimmed baking sheet, wire rack, instant-read thermometer


   Notes  

This recipe works for prime rib roasts of any size, from three to six ribs. For best results, use a dry-aged prime-grade or grass-fed roast. Cooking time is identical regardless of the number of ribs on the roast.



We do not recommend using store-bought prepared shio koji for any recipe, as store-bought versions vary wildly in quality. They are often too sweet and are treated with alcohol to extend shelf life. Making your own shio koji is worth the effort.



This recipe is best enjoyed right away.


   Read More  

Koji Beef Jus
The Food Lab's Definitive Guide to Prime Rib
Roasted and Reverse Seared Prime Rib
Perfect Prime Rib With Red Wine Jus










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




846
Calories


67g 
Fat


2g 
Carbs


55g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 12




Amount per serving


Calories
846


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 67g
86%


Saturated Fat 26g
130%


Cholesterol 201mg
67%


Sodium 260mg
11%


Total Carbohydrate 2g
1%


Dietary Fiber 1g
2%


Total Sugars 1g


Protein 55g




Vitamin C 1mg
4%


Calcium 37mg
3%


Iron 6mg
34%


Potassium 816mg
17%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















How to Roast a Perfect Chicken





















Koji Duck Confit Recipe





















13 Rules For Perfect Prime Rib | The Food Lab





















Crown Roast of Lamb With Couscous Stuffing and Pistachio-Mint Sauce





















Koji Beef Jus Recipe





















Slow-Roasted Boneless Leg of Lamb





















Easy Crown Roast of Pork Recipe





















How to Dry Age Beef


























Turkey Porchetta





















Perfect Prime Rib With Red Wine Jus Recipe





















Sous Vide Turkey Breast With Crispy Skin





















Pan-Seared, Butter-Basted Thick-Cut Steak Recipe





















Perfectly Grilled Lamb Rib or Loin Chops





















Pan-Roasted Rack of Lamb Recipe





















Roasted and Reverse Seared Prime Rib





















How to Smoke a Turkey






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



