












Homemade Milanos Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 




























 



 








































































 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Cookies





American





Baking





Chocolate








Homemade Milanos Recipe






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 30, 2018





WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Ryan Jones
































Milanos are strangely flavorless, mostly a symphony of texture. I don't use any vanilla in mine, but if you'd like to take yours up a notch, I've included an optional measurement for vanilla or extracts.



Piping these is a bit of a trick. A real Milano is smaller and thinner than you'd think. To pipe these sufficiently thin, you'll essentially want to use the pastry bag to just smear the dough out in a controlled fashion. It takes a bit of practice to get it right, but if you remember to hold the piping tip just barely above the sheet pan (about an eighth of an inch) you won't have much trouble. To finish, lift the piping tip straight up and leave a peak of dough behind. It will settle down a bit as it bakes and give the Milanos their distinctive shape.



To make mint or orange Milanos, just substitute the extract of choice for the vanilla in the ganache.



Note: All measurements are in weights, as volume measures can be very imprecise. I strongly recommend using a scale for all pastry projects. Serious Eats' recommends these kitchen scales.



BraveTart: Make Your Own Milanos




Recipe Details
Homemade Milanos Recipe




Active
25 mins




Total
45 mins






Makes
30 makes 30, 2" sandwich cookies






Save









Print







   Ingredients   



For the Cookie Batter:


3/4 ounce cornstarch


8 ounces flour


4 ounces butter


3 1/2 ounces sugar


2 ounces corn syrup


1/4 teaspoon baking soda


1/4 teaspoon salt


1/4 ounce powdered milk


1 egg


2 egg whites


Optional: 1 teaspoon vanilla bean paste or a teaspoon of any extract


For the Ganache Filling:


4 ounces dark or milk chocolate


2 ounces cream, a pinch more if necessary


1 teaspoon vanilla extract (or other flavor of your choice)


a pinch of salt














Directions





For the Cookie Batter: Preheat oven to 300°F (150°C) and line two cookie sheets with parchment and set aside. Use a sieve to sift cornstarch and flour together. With a hand or stand mixer (fitted with a paddle attachment), cream together butter, sugar, corn syrup, baking soda, salt, powdered milk and flavorings (if using). Cream for about 5 minutes on medium speed, until light and fluffy. About halfway through the mixing, scrape the bowl down with a rubber spatula.


After 5 minutes, with the mixer still running, add whole egg and mix until fully incorporated. Turn the mixer to low and add in half the starch/flour mixture. After it has incorporated, add one egg white. Repeat with remaining flour and egg white. Continue mixing until homogenous; shut off the mixer. Use a rubber spatula to transfer the batter to a piping bag, fitted with a 1/2-inch plain tip.





To pipe and bake the cookies: Pipe a smidgen of cookie dough onto all four corners of both sheets of parchment. Then flip the parchment over so the doughy corners are directly touching the cookie sheet. Use your fingers to smooth the parchment down. Now the parchment is "glued" to the cookie sheet and won't slide around while you pipe.


Aim to pipe cookies 30 to a tray, in five rows of six. Pipe cookies a little more than a half inch wide and 2-inch long. To pipe, hold the pastry bag so that the tip is perpendicular to the tray and only about an 1/8-inch from the surface. Really, you are aiming to smear dough out rather than pipe it out.


Squeeze the bag to begin piping and as soon as dough has hit the surface of the tray, immediately drag the tip two inches to the right (left if you are left handed). Stop piping and bring the tip back slightly toward the center of the cookie. Lift the tip straight up. This will give each cookie an oval shape with a roughly barbell like swelling at each end, and a peak of dough at one end.


Of course, you can pipe the cookies into any shape you like. Just take care that they are all roughly the same size so they will sandwich together nicely.


If you're a perfectionist and unhappy with your piping job, you can use a rubber spatula to scrape the dough back up and into the bag. Give yourself a fresh sheet of parchment and start again.


Bake for 25 minutes, rotating the trays halfway through, or until cookies have just taken on the slightest golden color around the edges but are otherwise quite anemic. If you notice cookies beginning to brown early, your oven may be running a little hot and your cookies will finish sooner.


Remove cookies from oven and set aside, still on the cookie sheets, until thoroughly cooled.





For the Ganache: In a very small pot, bring cream to a simmer. Shut off heat and add chocolate, vanilla (or other flavor), and salt. Use a whisk to stir gently, until chocolate melts. Whisk more vigorously to bring ganache together.


If mixture seems slightly curdled or lumpy, drizzle in a little extra cream, one tablespoonful at a time. Whisk all the while, until ganache is smooth.


Use a spatula to transfer ganache to a piping bag fit with a 1/4-inch plain tip.





To fill and finish the cookies: Begin matching up cookies into pairs that fit, bottom to bottom, together nicely. Don't worry if they don't match up closely, you just want to make sure you pair the biggest cookie and the smallest cookies together so there's no huge discrepancy between pairs.


Arrange half of the cookies bottoms up, with their mate sitting right beside, bottoms down.


Pipe a 1-inch strip of ganache down the center of each bottoms-up cookie (stopping a little shy of each end). Top each ganache covered cookie with its mate, using your fingers to gently press the cookies together and to push ganache out until its flush with the edges.


Repeat until all cookies have been sandwiched. Place cookies in fridge and chill for 10 minutes. Once cookies have chilled, transfer them to an airtight container, placing a sheet of parchment paper between layers.


Store at room temperature for one week, or two weeks refrigerated.




   Special equipment  

2 piping bags, 1/2-inch plain tip, 1/4-inch plain tip


  This Recipe Appears In  

BraveTart: Make Your Own Milanos







































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Homemade 'Nutter Butters' Recipe





















Choux au Craquelin Recipe





















Cream Puffs





















Homemade Animal Crackers Recipe





















Homemade Sno Balls Recipe





















Mock Batches (Soft Batch Cookie Copy Cat) Recipe





















Vanilla Ice Cream Sandwiches





















Gougères (Choux Pastry Cheese Puffs)


























Paris–Brest (Pâte à Choux With Praline Crème Mousseline) Recipe





















Homemade Oreo Cookies Recipe | BraveTart





















Orange Meringue Pie





















Homemade Brown Sugar Cinnamon Pop-Tarts Recipe





















Homemade Strawberry Shortcake Ice Cream Bars Recipe





















Construction Gingerbread Recipe





















Lemon Meringue Pie





















White Chocolate and Raspberry Frozen Mousse Bombes Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



