












Miso-Squash Soup With Sesame-Ginger Apples Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Dairy-free Mains





Vegan Mains





Vegetarian Mains





Stovetop





Apple








Miso-Squash Soup With Sesame-Ginger Apples Recipe
Inspired by a classic Japanese appetizer, this soup zeroes in on the nutty, earthy flavors of squash by simply simmering it in an aromatic dashi broth.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 28, 2022


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 




A creamy, savory, dairy-free squash soup. .
Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

A dashi liquid base adds a deep, savory flavor, but is even easier to make than most other stocks.Miso and lemon juice round out the soup's flavor, adding both brightness and richness.Soaking the diced apple briefly in salt water prevents browning, meaning you can make the garnish ahead of time.


It's always important to question your initial impulses. Just imagine if Lincoln had started the Gettysburg Address with his original text, which is believed to have been "These past 87 years have been one hell of a slow-motion train wreck, amiright?" Or if Martin Luther King had gone with the first draft of his March on Washington speech, tentatively titled I Slept Poorly Last Night. And think of the mess scientists would still be cleaning up today if Heisenberg had published his Absolutely-Damned-Certain Principle.



I'm proud to add this soup to the list of things that, once rejiggered, changed the course of history...or, in this case at least, changed the course of your first course. That's because what I originally wanted to do was make a roasted butternut squash soup, with its sweet, deep, earthy flavor. But then I thought, That's what everyone else does. How can I approach this soup in a different way?



Then I remembered one of my favorite squash preparations, kabocha no nimono, a Japanese dish of winter kabocha squash poached in a light dashi-based broth. Unlike roasting, which enhances caramelization of the squash's sugars, poaching plays up its nutty, savory flavors. It's a refreshing change of perspective on what squash can taste like.












Kabocha squash (in front) and red kuri squashes (with the protrusions on the stem ends) are both good choices for this soup.
Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



For this recipe, I used red kuri squash, a Japanese variety that is often available at farmers' markets, but kabocha or even butternut will work in its place. Kuri squash has a distinct chestnut-like taste, with a slightly starchy texture.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



For kabocha no nimono, the skin is usually left on the squash. For this soup, though, I peeled the squash, since the skin would only gunk up the texture once the squash was puréed. I highly recommend a Y-peeler with a sharp blade for this job; as you can see in the photo, I had to brace the squash against myself while peeling.



Just like in the nimono preparation, the base of this soup is dashi, the Japanese stock made from intensely savory ingredients like shaved bonito flakes and kombu seaweed, both of which are loaded with the glutamates responsible for umami flavors.



For years I read about the lifelong quest of Japanese chefs to master dashi making, and, frankly, it intimidated the heck out of me. But, as it turns out, basic dashi is extremely easy to make. I borrowed the shortcut method that Kenji uses for his miso soup recipe: Simply simmer the kombu and bonito flakes in water for five minutes, then let them stand for another five minutes before straining. It's easier than almost any other stock I know of.



To make the soup, I used the basic technique for any smoothly puréed vegetable soup, first sweating aromatics like leek, carrot, garlic, and ginger in oil, then adding the squash and just enough dashi to cover. The whole thing simmers until all the vegetables are fully softened.



You can blend everything in the pot if you have an immersion blender, or you can transfer it to the jar of a standing blender and purée it in batches. One word of warning for any time you're blending hot liquids: If the blender is set to high speed, a blast of steam can form immediately, strong enough to blow the top off and send hot liquid spraying everywhere. To avoid burns and a soup-splattered ceiling, I recommend setting the blender to its lowest speed and removing the hard plastic cap in the center of the blender's rubber lid, then placing a clean kitchen towel over the lid. The opening should act as a vent for steam, while the towel catches any splatter. Once it's going, you can crank the blender up to high speed without any problems.



A couple of tablespoons of miso added at this point build on the squash's savory flavor, adding extra depth and rounding out the flavor of the soup considerably, while a little lemon juice adds brightness.



I used a high-speed blender here, which is powerful enough to completely transform the vegetables and liquid into a purée with an incredibly silky texture. If yours isn't quite so powerful, you may want to press the soup through a fine-mesh strainer after blending, or you can just take the easy road by embracing its more rustic texture.



Most likely the soup will be too thick at this point—that's a good thing. It's far easier to thin a soup than it is to thicken it once it's been puréed. Just return the soup to the pot, add enough water to create a satiny-smooth, pourable consistency, and adjust the seasoning.



For a finishing touch, I whipped up a garnish made from diced apples, sliced scallions, minced fresh ginger, and sesame oil. It may seem safe to assume that a garnish like this is optional, but it's not. The apple adds bursts of fresh sweetness to what is otherwise a very savory soup—it really needs it to work.



To prevent my apple from browning, I used the salt-soaking method, which I've found to be the most effective out of several easy home methods using basic ingredients. This way, you can dice the apple and prepare the garnish while the vegetables are still simmering in the pot and have it ready when it's time for serving.



For one last (optional) touch, I sprinkled on a little shichimi togarashi, a Japanese spice blend made from chile powder, sansho pepper, dried orange peel, black sesame seeds, and ginger.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



I know I can't speak for the rest of you, but after this squash soup, I'll never think of the dish in quite the same way again.




October 2015




Recipe Details
Miso-Squash Soup With Sesame-Ginger Apples Recipe




Active
60 mins




Total
60 mins






Serves
4 servings




Inspired by a classic Japanese appetizer, this soup zeroes in on the nutty, earthy flavors of squash by simply simmering it in an aromatic dashi broth.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 1/2 quarts plus 2 cups water, divided, plus more as needed


1/2 ounce kombu (approximately a 4- by 6-inch piece; see notes)


1/2 ounce grated bonito flakes (about 3 cups; see notes)


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon vegetable oil, divided


1 leek, white and light green parts only, diced (about 1 1/2 cups)


2 medium carrots, diced (about 1 cup)


2 medium cloves garlic, sliced


2 (1 1/2-inch) knobs ginger, 1 knob peeled and thinly sliced, 1 knob peeled and finely grated, divided


1 (2-pound) squash, such as kuri, kabocha, or butternut, peeled, seeded, and diced


2 tablespoons white or red miso paste


1 tablespoon fresh juice from 1 lemon


1 teaspoon kosher salt, plus more as needed


Pinch sugar, if needed


1 large crisp apple, such as Fuji, peeled, cored, and diced


1 large or 2 medium scallions, white and light green parts only, thinly sliced on the bias


1 teaspoon toasted sesame seeds


1/2 teaspoon toasted sesame oil


1 teaspoon rice vinegar


Shichimi togarashi, optional (see notes)















Directions





Combine 1 1/2 quarts water, kombu, and bonito flakes in a large saucepan and bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce to a bare simmer and cook for 5 minutes. Remove from heat, let cool for 5 minutes, then strain through a fine-mesh strainer. Discard solids and set dashi aside.















In a large Dutch oven or soup pot, heat 1 tablespoon oil over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add leek, carrot, garlic, and sliced ginger. Cook, stirring, until vegetables are glistening and just starting to turn tender, about 4 minutes.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Add squash and pour just enough dashi on top to cover vegetables. Bring to a simmer and cook until vegetables are fully tender, about 30 minutes. Using a standing blender or immersion blender, and working in batches if necessary, blend soup until very smooth. Blend in miso and lemon juice.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Return soup to pot and thin with enough water to reach a pourable, silky-smooth consistency. Season with salt, add sugar to taste, and keep warm.





Meanwhile, fill a medium bowl with 2 cups water and 1 teaspoon kosher salt. Add diced apple and let soak for 10 minutes. Drain apple well, then return to bowl. Toss with grated ginger, scallions, toasted sesame seeds, sesame oil, rice vinegar, and remaining 1 teaspoon vegetable oil. Season with salt, if needed.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






To serve, ladle hot soup into bowls and top with the apple-scallion salad. Garnish with shichimi togarashi, if desired.




   Special Equipment  

Fine-mesh strainer, blender


   Notes  

Kombu and bonito flakes (katsuobushi) can be found in any Japanese market or in the international section of most well-stocked supermarkets. For best results, use real kombu and bonito flakes. Alternatively, you can use powdered dashi mix; follow the instructions on the package.



Shichimi togarashi is a Japanese spice blend made with chile powder, sansho pepper, dried orange peel, ginger, and black sesame seeds.


   Read More  

Dashi 101: A Guide to the Umami-Rich Japanese Stock
A Guide to Winter Squash: How to Choose, Store, and Cook Your Gourds
Classic Butternut Squash Soup Recipe
Mexican Butternut Squash Soup With Ancho Chile, Crema, and Pepitas Recipe
Quick and Easy Stovetop Butternut Squash Soup Recipe










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




203
Calories


6g 
Fat


34g 
Carbs


6g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 4




Amount per serving


Calories
203


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 6g
8%


Saturated Fat 1g
3%


Cholesterol 5mg
2%


Sodium 937mg
41%


Total Carbohydrate 34g
12%


Dietary Fiber 8g
29%


Total Sugars 12g


Protein 6g




Vitamin C 29mg
147%


Calcium 131mg
10%


Iron 2mg
11%


Potassium 734mg
16%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Guide to Ramen Varieties





















A Seaweed Primer: How to Use Kelp, Nori, Wakame, and More





















A Guide to Winter Squash: How to Choose, Store, and Cook Your Gourds





















28 Quick Soup Recipes for Fast Fall Meals





















Ultimate Vegan Ramen With Miso Broth Recipe





















Classic Butternut Squash Soup





















21 Miso Recipes for Soups, Salads, Snacks, and More





















Dashi 101: A Guide to the Umami-Rich Japanese Stock


























Celery Soup With Peanut Crumble and Pickled Grapes Recipe





















Pumpkin Spice Latte (With Real Squash)





















Creamy Spiced Parsnip Soup Recipe





















Thanksgiving Stuffed Roast Pumpkins





















Butternut Squash Purée





















Chicken Salad With Avocado, Corn, and Miso Dressing





















From-Scratch Shio Ramen Recipe





















10 Cold Soup Recipes for Hot, Hot Weather






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



