












Homemade Vegan Burgers Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes By Course





Mains





Mains By Type





Burgers




Homemade Vegan Burgers
After tasting these, you'll never look at veggie burgers the same way again.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 24, 2023
























































(24)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Photographs: J. Kenji Lopez-Alt

































In This Recipe


Expand





Building the Perfect Veggie Burger




Part 1: The Veggies




Part 2: The Beans




Part 3: Adding Nuts




Part 4: The Grains




Amping Up Flavor and Moisture









Why It Works

Roasting the mushrooms before chopping them drives off moisture while also adding flavor.Lentils add flavor, while chickpeas contribute texture.Using both cashews and pine nuts added flavor as well as texture.Barley adds body and flavor, while panko breadcrumbs help the patties hold together.Incorporating roasted eggplant boosted flavor while also adding necessary moisture.


I like to think of Serious Eats as more than just a food blog. It's really a relationship between the editors and contributors, and you guys: the Serious Eats Community-At-Large. A like with any relationship, occasionally the routine can hit a rut.



I've tinkered with and written about burgers a whole lot in the last couple of years. So much so that there are, in fact, times when I'm simply at a loss as to what to tinker with and write about next. But if there's one thing that being married has taught me, it's that whenever your relationship hits a holding pattern, it's always best to turn to your spouse to seek for ways in which to liven it up. You see that way, if it works out, everyone's happy. And if it doesn't? Well it makes it a heck of a lot easier to blame the other person. This is valuable relationship advice. Take note.



So when it came time for me to write another burger-based installment of The Food Lab, I decided to take my own advice to heart and went searching for ideas on my Facebook page, through my Twitter feed, and via our message boards. The overwhelming response? Veggie burgers.



Don't like that idea? You've got nobody to blame but yourselves.



Personally, I do like a good veggie burger. And I'm not talking one of those hockey puck, soy protein, faux-meat, painted-on-grill-mark atrocities aimed at vegetarians who secretly (or publicly) miss meat. I'm talking a veggie burger that actually tastes of grains and vegetables. A veggie burger that celebrates its veggie-ness yet can stand up to and be complemented by the typical toppings and condiments you'd find at a backyard cookout. I'm talking a veggie burger that even a meat-eater would happily eat—topped with cheese and bacon, if they want.



And heck, just for the fun of it, why not add an extra challenge here and make the burgers 100 percent vegan as well?


   Building the Perfect Veggie Burger  

There are a few key characteristics that I look for in a great veggie patty.



The burger must be structurally sound. I want a veggie burger that holds its shape and doesn't have the texture of mashed potatoes, squishing out the back of the bun as I bite down.The burger must have good textural contrast. All lumps or all smooth is no good. I want the patty to be soft and tender, but have little bits and bites of crunch and chew.The burger's flavor must be good, but not overly assertive. I want my burger to have a good balance of savory flavors. What I don't is for a single flavor—say a spice or an herb—to dominate, restricting my topping choices.The burger must hold together on a griddle or grill. A veggie burger that cracks or crumbles and falls into the grill grates when you cook it may as well not ever have existed in the first place.The burger must not suck.



With that in mind, I stepped into the kitchen.


   Part 1: The Veggies  

Working with a very basic recipe of dried mashed lentils as my base, I decided to test each and every component to work towards my final recipe.



The main flavor base for a good veggie burger should be—surprise—the veggies, and I knew that some member of the onion family would play a crucial role in that flavorful backbone. Members of the onion family (aka alliums) are unique amongst the vegetable world in that when used properly, they have an innate ability to bring out the savory qualities of the other ingredients they are cooked with. A burger topped with a slice of onion or a mushroom sautéed with a brunoise of shallots doesn't taste onion-y per se, but they do taste more savory.












Serious Eats



I tried adding shallots, regular onions (of the red, yellow, white, and sweet variety), and scallions to the mix before finally settling on a combination of leeks and a little bit of garlic. Known as the "soup onion," leeks more than any other type of onion have the ability to meld into the background.



I sautéed my leeks and garlic in a bit of oil to soften them before chopping them and adding them to the mix. A stalk of celery sautéed alongside them also added flavor without overwhelming the palate.



I knew that if I wanted my burgers to taste extra savory and moist, I'd need to use a couple of glutamate-rich powerhouses in my mix. Glutamates are the chemical compounds that are largely responsible for our sense of savoriness in a dish. Meat is packed with them, as are a number of vegetables. Mushrooms are high up on that list.












Serious Eats



In order to concentrate the flavor of my shrooms and drive off some excess moisture, I roasted them right alongside the eggplant until they were deeply browned and had lost about half of their weight in water.



Roughly chopped in the food processor, the mushrooms are a good first step towards adding the texture I'm looking for.


   Part 2: The Beans  

Nobody says that veggie burgers always have to contain beans, but there's a good reason they almost always do. Beans are a great way to add texture and their starchiness makes them ideal binders. I experimented with a whole slew of options—black beans, cannellini, kidney, fava, pinto—but most of them turned out to be far too flavorful on their own. No matter what you do, a veggie burger made with black beans turns into, well, a black bean burger. That's not a bad thing, but not what I was after.












Serious Eats



I ended up narrowing my choices down to two: lentils and chickpeas. Both were flavorful but mild enough to complement the other elements nicely. Really, either would have done, but as I found with my vegetarian chili recipe, chickpeas are great for adding texture when you roughly chop them in the food processor.












Serious Eats


   Part 3: Adding Nuts  

My new chickpea and vegetable-based patties were good, but they were still lacking in both texture and flavor. As is often the case, I happened to have Vince of Slap Chop fame's nuts on my mind during this iteration and figured that chopped nuts should be the way to go.












Serious Eats



As with the beans, most nuts were a no-go. Peanuts, walnuts, pecans, and hazelnuts were all far too assertive. Macadamia nuts worked flavor-wise, but got a little soft in the mix with a strange, off-putting texture. This left cashews and pine nuts, and both worked wonderfully, adding a bit of soft crunch, as well as what can only be described as nuttiness to the mix.












Serious Eats



Into the food processor they went.


   Part 4: The Grains  










Serious Eats



With most of my flavoring and textural elements in place, I was honing in on some patties that I was happy with. Next ingredient: some form of grain to tie the whole thing together.












Serious Eats



After trying (and failing) with wheat berries, oats, cooked rice, and cooked pasta, it came down to barley and bulgur wheat. While the latter was a bit easier to cook (all you have to do is soak it in boiling water until it hydrates), the finished patties were far too reminiscent of falafel. That's not a bad thing if falafel's your bag, but I don't want people eating my veggie burgers to pigeonhole them into one category of ethnic foodstuffs. I preferred the far more cuisine-neutral character of barley. Think of it as the Switzerland of grains.












Serious Eats



The texture was nearly there, but the patties were a bit mushy, lacking structure. Some breadcrumbs added to the mix solved this problem nicely. I went with Japanese-style panko for their heartier texture. I found that cooking the patties right after the breadcrumbs were incorporated was absolutely essential to good texture. Let the mixture sit too long, and the breadcrumbs absorb too much liquid and the patty once again returns to mush.












Serious Eats



Now how's that for some textural contrast?


   Amping Up Flavor and Moisture  

At this point, I was pretty darn happy with my burger. It was certainly more flavorful than anything you could get in the store, but it still wasn't quite at the level of competing with an actual hamburger. I wanted a veggie burger that a meat eater would realistically choose even when there was actual ground chuck staring them in the face. This meant more flavor and even juicier texture.



The one major advantage that meat has over vegetables in terms of delivering juice to a burger patty is in its fat. Animal fat is tends to be more highly saturated then vegetable-based fats. Because saturated fats stack together more tightly and easily, they tend to be firmer at a given temperature. Most animal fats don't melt until well above room temperature, while most plant-based fats are liquid at room temperature.



What does this mean? It means that with a well-made beef-based burger patty, your fat stays in discrete firm chunks that melt only as the patty starts to cook, basting the meat in fat and creating little pockets of chin-dripping juiciness that show themselves only when you bite down on the burger. Vegetable-based patties, on the other hand, don't have this advantage, which means that you have to build the extra moisture directly into them if you want them to have any chance at survival.



In my previous adventures with non-beef burgers, I discovered the secret to adding moisture to a lean turkey burger without overwhelming it or ruining its texture: roasted puréed eggplant.












Serious Eats



I decided that since I was roasting some mushrooms already, I may as well throw an eggplant in there with them. Roasted eggplant is some really magical stuff. Not only does it taste great on its own (just throw in a bit of good olive oil and lemon juice), but it has the characteristic of being able to carry many other flavors along for the ride, all while adding a subtle sweet meatiness.












Serious Eats



When combined with my chopped mushrooms, it added exactly the moisture that my patties needed, even helping them to brown a bit better in the pan.



Taking another queue from my Turkey Burger recipe, I decided to add a bit of Marmite to my patties to help boost up their savoriness. A product made from the spent yeast leftover after fermenting alcohol, Marmite (or the Australian equivalent Vegemite) is a concentrated source of glutamates. I use it in everything from soups and stews to, well, veggie burgers.












Serious Eats




March 2012

This recipe was cross-tested in 2023 and updated with more accurate measurements to guarantee best results.




Recipe Details
Homemade Vegan Burgers




Active
60 mins




Total
90 mins






Serves
8 servings




After tasting these, you'll never look at veggie burgers the same way again.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 1/2 pounds (598g) button mushrooms, trimmed (about 8 cups)


1/4 cup plus 1/2 tablespoons neutral oil such as canola or vegetable oil, divided


3 1/2 teaspoons kosher salt, plus more to taste; if using table salt use half as much by volume


1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper, plus more to taste


6 thyme sprigs


1 whole small eggplant (about 8 ounces; 241g)


2 large leeks (5 1/2 ounces; 154g), trimmed, whites and pale green parts chopped fine (about 1 1/2 cups) 


1 large celery rib (about 2 ounces; 65g), chopped fine (about 1/2 cup) 


1 medium (5g) clove garlic, grated on a microplane grater (about 1 teaspoon)


3/4 cup dried pearled barley (5 5/8 ounces; 159g)


One 14-ounce can garbanzo beans, drained and patted dry on paper towels (7 1/2 ounces; 210g)


1/4 cup all-purpose flour (1 1/8 ounces; 13g)


2 teaspoons baking powder


1 teaspoon marmite, vegemite, or Maggi seasoning


1 cup toasted cashews, pinenuts, or a mix (4 1/2 ounces; 127g)


1 teaspoon soy sauce


1 1/2 cups panko-style bread crumbs (3 3/4 ounces; 105g) (see note)


4 slices (about 1-ounce each) plant-based or preferred dairy cheese, optional


8 hamburger bun burger buns















Directions





Adjust oven rack to middle position and heat oven to 350°F. In a large bowl, toss mushrooms with 2 tablespoons oil, 2 teaspoons salt, and 1/8 teaspoon pepper. Brush eggplant with 1/2 tablespoon oil and sprinkle evenly with 1 teaspoon salt and remaining 1/8 teaspoon pepper. Wrap eggplant with aluminum foil. Transfer mushrooms and eggplant to an aluminum foil-lined rimmed baking sheet. Sprinkle thyme over mushrooms. Bake, turning mushrooms and wrapped eggplant occasionally until mushrooms are dark brown and eggplant is completely tender (test with a cake tester or thin skewer), about 45 minutes to 1 hour. Set aside and let cool until ready to use. 





While mushrooms and eggplant roast, in a large skillet, heat remaining two tablespoons oil over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add leeks, celery, and 1/2 teaspoon of salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 4 minutes. Add garlic and cook, stirring constantly, until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Transfer mixture to a medium bowl and set aside to cool.





In a large saucepan, add barley and cover with water by 2-inches and bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce heat as needed to maintain a simmer. Simmer barley, stirring occasionally, until the barley is tender, about 20 minutes. Drain and transfer cooked barley to a clean kitchen towel or a triple layer of heavy-duty paper towels; spread barley into an even layer to let cool, about 20 minutes. Transfer barley to a large bowl; set aside until ready to use.





Carefully unwrap eggplant; trim and cut in half lengthwise. Cut one half of the eggplant into 1-inch cubes (reserve remaining half of eggplant for another use.) Add prepared eggplant to the bowl of a food processor. Add half of garbanzo beans, flour, baking powder, soy sauce, and Marmite. Process until a smooth paste forms, scraping down sides as needed, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer mixture to bowl with cooked barley. 





Add remaining chickpeas to the now-empty food processor and pulse until beans are chopped to about the size of a lentil, 6 to 10 pulses, scraping down sides as needed; transfer to bowl with barley mixture. Add cashews or pine nuts to the now-empty bowl of the food processor and pulse in short bursts until coarsely chopped and about the size of a lentil, about 30 pulses. Add to the barley mixture.





Add the cooled mushrooms to the now-empty bowl of the food processor and pulse until finely chopped but still coarse in texture, 8 to 10 short pulses. Add to the barley mix. Transfer leeks and celery to the now-empty food processor and process until finely chopped, 8 to 10 short pulses; add to the barley mixture.





Using bare hands or a spatula, stir together mixture until completely homogenous. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Mixture can be refrigerated and stored for up to 5 days at this point or frozen in an airtight freezer bag for up to 3 months.





When ready to serve, add breadcrumbs to mixture and work them in with your hands. Shape a sample patty (about 6 ¼ ounces). It should have the texture of ground beef and hold together easily. If needed, add water 1 tablespoon at a time until it comes together. Divide mixture into eight 6 1/4 ounce (177g) patties that measure about 4 to 5-inches across and 1/2 to 3/4-inch thick. Patties must be cooked within 30 minutes of adding breadcrumbs (see note).





 To Finish on a Griddle or in a Skillet: In a large skillet for griddle pan, heat 3 tablespoons of oil over medium heat until shimmering. Add four patties and cook without moving until the bottom side is well-browned, 3 to 4 minutes. (I like to press a disk of sliced onion into the top side while it cooks.) Flip burgers and top with cheese, if using, and cook until the second side is browned and cheese is melted, 3 to 4 minutes. Transfer to a toasted bun and serve with condiments as desired. Repeat with remaining burgers.





To Finish on the Grill: Preheat a gas or charcoal grill with a medium-high fire. Clean and oil cooking grate. Cook the burgers, (covered if using a gas grill) without moving, until well-browned, about 4 minutes. Flip burgers, top with cheese, if using, and cook until the second side is well browned, about 4 minutes. Transfer to toasted buns. Serve.




   Special Equipment  

food processor


   Notes  

For best texture, the veggie burgers must be cooked within thirty minutes of adding bread crumbs or they will become mushy. To prepare in advance, combine all ingredients except for crumbs and mix in the crumbs just before forming the patties and serving.


   Read More  

2 Awesome Homemade Vegetarian Burgers Even a Carnivore Will Crave






American





Dairy-free Mains





Vegan Mains





Vegetarian Mains





Grilling















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




595
Calories


24g 
Fat


76g 
Carbs


21g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8




Amount per serving


Calories
595


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 24g
31%


Saturated Fat 6g
28%


Cholesterol 14mg
5%


Sodium 1484mg
65%


Total Carbohydrate 76g
28%


Dietary Fiber 10g
35%


Total Sugars 11g


Protein 21g




Vitamin C 6mg
32%


Calcium 345mg
27%


Iron 8mg
42%


Potassium 769mg
16%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















19 Grilled Burger Recipes to Make All Summer Long





















The Best Supermarket Veggie Burgers





















25 Nutty, Tasty, and Filling Recipes With Whole Grains





















10 Tips for Better Burgers | The Food Lab





















In-N-Out Burger Secret Menu Guide





















What’s the Best Way to Grind Beef?





















The Best Imitation-Meat Burgers (Including the Impossible, and Beyond)





















A Better Big Mac Recipe


























The Ultimate Homemade McRib (Smoked-Rib Sandwich) Recipe





















Really Awesome Black Bean Burgers Recipe





















What Is American Cheese, Anyway?





















How Often Should You Flip a Burger?





















The Best Patty Melt Recipe





















The Ultimate Bacon Cheeseburgers Recipe





















Sous Vide Burgers





















Guide to Grilling Great Burgers






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



