












Is it Really Necessary to Add Garlic After the Onions When Sautéing?























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 


















 



 



































 




























 



















































 




















 












































 















 




















 














 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Stovetop Guides





Vegetable Guides








Is it Really Necessary to Add Garlic After the Onions When Sautéing?






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 10, 2018













Trending Videos














 




 Why do some recipes say to add garlic only after the onions have already cooked for a few minutes? .
Daniel Gritzer unless otherwise noted

































In This Article


Expand





Why Is Garlic Usually Added After the Onion When Sautéing?




How Garlic Cooks Over High Heat




How Garlic Cooks Over Low Heat




What Happens When You Add Onions?




Difference in Flavor






   Why Is Garlic Usually Added After the Onion When Sautéing?  

"So many recipes say to sauté onions first, then add the garlic. Why is that? And why can't I just add them to the pan at the same time?"



There aren't many foods that taste good burned, but garlic is something of a special case. Even before it has fully turned into blackened bits of carbon, sautéed garlic can smell and taste acrid and bitter. We sear meats until well browned, we cook onions until rich and caramelized, but, for the most part, we don't seek the flavor of chestnut-colored garlic bits.



To help cooks avoid burning their garlic, a lot of recipes call for sautéing other aromatics first, like onions, carrots, and celery, and then adding the garlic for the last few minutes. But that doesn't mean you can't add garlic at the beginning: you just need to be mindful of a few variables that can spell the difference between success and disaster.



The other thing to keep in mind is that your dish will often taste different depending on when you add the garlic. I'll come back to that in a bit. First, let's see what happens when you sauté garlic all by itself.



One of the reasons garlic is more susceptible to burning than onion is because it has significantly less water content and higher amounts of naturally occurring sugars like fructose.* Also, garlic is often thinly sliced or minced, and those small pieces can cook much faster than larger pieces of diced or sliced onion.



*Mcgee, pgs. 312-313.



Exactly how quickly garlic cooks, though, depends not only on the heat of the pan, but also the size of the garlic pieces. Let's start with a rip-roaring hot pan.


   How Garlic Cooks Over High Heat  










High heat, 15-second cooking time.



Above we see three cloves of garlic prepared three ways: minced, sliced, and then a crushed whole clove. This photo was taken about 15 seconds after all of the garlic was added to a very hot pan. Note how the minced garlic is already browning around the edges.












High heat, 30-second cooking time.



At the 30-second mark, all of the garlic is lost, but of the three, the minced garlic is in the worst shape. Because of all the exposed surface area, there's not much left of it that isn't overcooked. The whole crushed clove, meanwhile, is too brown on the surface, but everything below the surface is still fine.



Clearly, adding garlic all by itself to a very hot pan isn't generally a great idea unless you really want that pungent browned-garlic flavor and are ready to add moisture to the pan before things go too far.


   How Garlic Cooks Over Low Heat  

Now let's see how garlic does in a pan over low heat.












Low heat, 2-minute cooking time.



The photo above shows the same scenario, except the heat is now very low. This shot was taken a full two minutes into the cooking time, and the garlic is just starting to lightly brown.












Low heat, 4.5-minute cooking time.



At about four and a half minutes, the garlic has finally crossed the line into territory that I'd say is undesirable. The takeaway here is that with low enough heat, your risk of burning garlic—even when it's the only thing in the pan—is low, no matter how small the garlic is cut.


   What Happens When You Add Onions?  

To see what happens when the garlic is cooked with onions from the start, I tried out a couple new tests. Since I've already established that when cooked over low heat, garlic doesn't burn very quickly, let's focus on two high-heat scenarios with onions.* In the first, I cooked sliced onion and minced garlic in a small pan over high heat. In the second, I cooked the exact same quantity of garlic and onion in a large skillet over high heat. In both cases I stirred and tossed the onion and garlic frequently.



*For the ultra-curious out there, I also ran tests of onion and garlic over low heat, and burning is just not an issue.



The reason I tested out pan size is that as the onion cooks, it releases water into the pan, which helps prevent the garlic from burning. I reasoned that in a larger skillet, the onion may not release enough liquid to moisten the entire surface of the pan, allowing some of the garlic to burn. Let's see what happens.












Small pan, high heat, 1-minute cooking time.



So right above, we have the onion and garlic in the smaller pan almost exactly one minute after I started cooking them. There's already some color developing, but nothing is really burning or getting worryingly brown.












Large pan, high heat, 1-minute cooking time.



In this next photo, we have the onion and garlic in the larger skillet also at the one-minute mark. So far, this one is looking pretty good too.












Small pan, high heat, 1.5-minute cooking time.



Thirty seconds later, at the 1.5 minute mark, and there's a bit more browning in the smaller skillet above. A few tiny pieces of garlic may be edging towards too dark, but nothing terrible has happened here yet.












Why do some recipes say to add garlic only after the onions have already cooked for a few minutes?.
Daniel Gritzer unless otherwise noted



In the larger skillet, meanwhile, the browning is a little more pronounced, and while it may be hard to see in the photo above, some of the garlic has already crossed over into the over-browned realm.*



*I should note here that while I was working on induction burners that were set to the exact same heat level, I suspect the larger skillet never got quite as hot as the smaller one, either because the skillet is too large for the burner, or because the skillet had a small bulge on the bottom that prevented it from making full contact with the burner's surface. I didn't have an infrared thermometer to measure the surface temperatures in the pans, but from what I observed, the larger pan was a little less hot than the smaller one. All of this is to say that if the larger pan had been as hot as the smaller one, I think we would see an even more drastic difference in the rate of browning in the two skillets, with the contents of the larger skillet already starting to burn.



The one takeaway here is that if you decide to cook onion and garlic together over high heat, make sure to choose the right-sized pan: The larger the pan, the better the chance that your garlic is going to burn.


   What About Flavor?  

So far, we've established two fairly common-sense rules about cooking onions with garlic without the garlic burning: use low heat and a pan size that won't leave a lot of exposed surface area. We could just stop there, but it leaves one question unanswered: Even if we prevent burning by using low heat and a small pan, is there a significant flavor difference between batches in which one has the garlic cooked in it from the start and the other has the garlic added only for the last couple minutes of cooking?



I cooked up two side-by-side batches of equal quantities of diced onion and minced garlic to find out. In one, the onion and garlic went in the pan at the same time. In the other, I added the garlic about two minutes before the onion was done cooking. Then I asked my colleagues to taste both blind and tell me which they preferred and why.












Onions and garlic cooked together from the start.
Vicky Wasik



The two batches don't look significantly different, and there's nothing burned in either of them. And yet the flavor difference was drastic. The onions that were cooked from the start with the garlic had a much mellower flavor—it was hard to detect a strong garlic flavor.












Onions cooked first, then garlic added for the last two minutes.
Vicky Wasik



The batch in which the garlic was added at the end, though, had a pronounced garlicky flavor. Most of my colleagues preferred that one, though not all did. If you like stronger garlicky flavors, it's better to hold the garlic back until later, but if you don't, consider adding it earlier on.



Got a question for Serious Eats? Email your questions to AskTheFoodLab@seriouseats.com and please include your Serious Eats user name in your email. All questions will be read, though unfortunately not all can be answered.













































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Bucatini all'Amatriciana





















French Onion Soup (Soupe à l'Oignon Gratinée) Recipe





















Perfect (Almost) No-Stir Risotto





















Grilled Paella Mixta (Mixed Paella With Chicken and Seafood) Recipe





















How to Make Tadka





















Pressure Cooker Beef Barley Soup Recipe





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















How to Caramelize Onions


























Traditional French Cassoulet





















The Best Flat-Bottomed Woks





















Shrimp Fra Diavolo (Shrimp and Pasta with Spicy Tomato Sauce) Recipe





















Pan-Seared, Butter-Basted Thick-Cut Steak Recipe





















The Best Way to Mince Garlic





















Lomo Saltado (Peruvian Stir-Fried Beef With Onion, Tomatoes, and French Fries) Recipe





















The Best Crispy Roast Potatoes Ever Recipe





















The Ultimate Sliders Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



