












Spicy Cumin Lamb Skewers (Yang Rou Chuan) Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Method





Grilling





Grilled Lamb




Spicy Cumin Lamb Skewers (Yang Rou Chuan) Recipe
A Beijing street food straight from your own grill.






By

Shao Z.








 

Shao Z.




 


 

 


 

 


 



Shao Zhi Zhong is a Chinese-born and Philadelphia-raised food writer and recipe developer who specializes in Chinese home cooking. She's also a web designer.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated June 30, 2022
























































(7)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck

































In This Recipe


Expand





Selecting the Right Cut of Lamb




Making the Spice Mix




Assembling and Grilling the Skewers









Why It Works

Coarsely grinding the spices ensures they don't become pasty when wet.Lamb shoulder chops offer the perfect balance of fat and meat for juicy, tender, flavorful skewers.


I can't resist meat on a stick. There is just something about seeing skewered chunks of meat slowly cooking over an open fire that pulls me in. Every country has its own version of the kebab, but in Beijing, China, you're likely to find lamb rubbed with chile peppers and cumin. Called yang rou chuan, these spicy lamb skewers are one of the city's most popular street foods. And they should be just as popular at home.



Like most meat on a stick, yang rou chuan is portable, flavorful, cooks in minutes, and is incredibly easy to make—all good reasons to consider it for your next cookout.


   Selecting the Right Cut of Lamb  

To start, you need to pick out the right cut of meat, since not all are kebab-friendly.













For example, you don't want a cut of lamb that's too lean, like the loin. I prefer to use the shoulder chop since it's relatively inexpensive and has a good ratio of meat to fat—and just to be clear, when I cut up the chops for skewering, I leave all the fat on. Fat equals juiciness and flavor.


   Making the Spice Mix  

Next comes the spice rub. A combination of cumin and chile flakes gives yang rou chuan their distinctive flavor and heat. Those are often the only two seasonings, aside from salt, but for this recipe I wanted to add a few supporting ingredients for an extra boost—I went with granulated garlic (which is different from garlic powder), fennel seeds, and a splash of Shaoxing wine.



To grind the spices, I prefer to use a mortar and pestle, since it ensures you won't over-grind them into a powder that turns pasty when wet. You can use an electric spice grinder, but I'd recommend checking every few pulses to make sure it's still a little bit coarse.












   Assembling and Grilling the Skewers  

Once you have your lamb cut and your spices pounded, toss them together until the meat is thoroughly coated. I reserve a little of the spice mixture to add at the end of grilling, just for an additional flavor boost.



Then I thread the meat onto skewers.













To grill them, I start by putting the skewers over indirect heat until mostly cooked through, which takes about four minutes per side.













Then I move them to direct heat for about one minute, just long enough to get a good sear.













I sprinkle the reserved spice mixture all over them at this point, which adds a layer of freshness over all the toasted spices.



There's no need for a sauce or a dip with these skewers: They're more than flavorful enough, as-is. The only thing that could make them better is an ice cold beer.














May 2015




Recipe Details
Spicy Cumin Lamb Skewers (Yang Rou Chuan) Recipe




Prep
10 mins




Cook
35 mins




Active
30 mins




Total
45 mins






Serves
6
to 8 servings




Makes
10 skewers




A Beijing street food straight from your own grill.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 tablespoon red chile flakes


1 tablespoon whole cumin seeds


2 teaspoons whole fennel seeds


1 teaspoon kosher salt


2 teaspoons granulated garlic


2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, meat cut into 1-inch pieces (see notes)


1 tablespoon vegetable or canola oil


2 teaspoons Shaoxing wine















Directions





Submerge the bamboo skewers in a container of cold water and let them soak for at least 2 hours or even overnight.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






In a mortar and pestle or spice grinder, coarsely grind chile flakes, cumin, and fennel. Add granulated garlic and kosher salt and briefly grind to break salt into smaller pieces and thoroughly combine ingredients.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






Reserve 1 tablespoon of the spice mix in a small bowl. Add lamb to a large bowl and toss thoroughly with the remaining spice mix, oil, and Shaoxing wine. Thread lamb onto skewers, making sure meat is bunched tightly together and leaving no parts of the skewer exposed except for a 3-inch handle at the bottom, and the pointy tip at the top.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






Light one chimney full of charcoal. When all the charcoal is lit and covered with gray ash, pour out and arrange coals on one side of the charcoal grate. Set cooking grate in place, cover grill and allow to preheat for 5 minutes. Clean and oil the grilling grate.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






Grill skewers, covered, over indirect heat until lamb is nearly cooked through, about 4 minutes per side.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






Move skewers over direct heat, sprinkle with the reserved spice mix, and cook until well seared on both sides, about 1 minute total.











Serious Eats / Julia Hartbeck






Remove skewers from the grill and serve right away.




   Special Equipment  

Grill, bamboo skewers, mortar and pestle or spice grinder


   Notes  

Type of fire: two-zone indirect
Grill heat: medium-high



For the most flavorful, tender, and juicy skewers, don't trim off any of the fat from the shoulder chops. Pre-soaking the bamboo skewers for at least two hours or even overnight before using is an important step to prevent them from burning during grilling.






Grilled Lamb





Chinese





Lamb Shoulder





Lamb Mains















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




175
Calories


8g 
Fat


2g 
Carbs


23g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
175


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 8g
10%


Saturated Fat 2g
11%


Cholesterol 73mg
24%


Sodium 238mg
10%


Total Carbohydrate 2g
1%


Dietary Fiber 1g
2%


Total Sugars 0g


Protein 23g




Vitamin C 1mg
3%


Calcium 28mg
2%


Iron 3mg
15%


Potassium 370mg
8%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















18 Kebab Recipes for Labor Day





















Kofte Kebabs With Spicy Harissa Yogurt Sauce and Grilled Flatbread (Minced Lamb Kebabs) Recipe





















Skewer This: 19 Kickass Kebabs for Your Cookout





















Moo Ping (Thai-Style Grilled Pork Skewers) Recipe





















Adana Kebabs (Ground Lamb Kebabs)





















How to Make Great Grilled Kebabs





















35 Spicy Recipes to Bring (and Beat) the Heat





















Thai-Style Grilled Chicken (Gai Yang) Recipe


























Cochinita Pibil (Yucatán-Style Barbecued Pork) Recipe





















Seekh Kebabs (Pakistani Spicy Grilled Ground Meat Skewers) Recipe





















Balinese Pork Satay (Sate Babi) With Sweet Soy Glaze and Peanut Sauce Recipe





















Toothpick Lamb





















Cambodian Grilled Lemongrass Beef Skewers Recipe





















Homemade Merguez Sausage





















Thai-Style Chicken Satay With Peanut-Tamarind Dipping Sauce Recipe





















Nem Lụi Huế (Huế Lemongrass Pork Skewers)






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



