












Campfire Chili in a Dutch Oven Recipe


























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Chili





Braised & Stewed Pork





Cannellini & Kidney Beans





Pork Shoulder





Sausages








Campfire Chili in a Dutch Oven Recipe
Fulfill your Dutch oven's destiny by making something satisfying over an open fire.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated June 18, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt

































In This Recipe


Expand





What to Cook in a Dutch Oven While Camping




How to Build A Fire for Dutch Oven Cooking




Making Dutch Oven Chili




A Quick Note About Cast Iron









Why It Works

A cast iron Dutch oven is the perfect vessel for cooking over a fire for long periods of time.Any kind of fatty meat with plenty of connective tissue works here.Grinding your own chili powder with dried chiles makes for the most flavorful chili.


Now I'm no expert in outdoor survival, and about 99% of the camping I do is of the set-up-a-tent-near-the-car variety that my sister likes to make so much fun of (ok fine—100%), but if there's one thing I do know how to do, it's to comfortably and tastily stuff large groups of people in a variety of settings. For this task, there are several approaches you can take in an outdoor setting.



Hobo packs are the simplest and least precise. Just wrap your ingredients in a foil pouch, toss'em into the fire, fish'em out a little while later, and hope for the best. It's a tasty, if slightly unpredictable way to get hot food with minimal supplies. (Pro-tip: unshucked ears of corn are nature's hobo packs. No foil necessary!)



The next step up is to bring along a grill to set yourself up over hot coals. Haul along a couple of pots and pans, and you can not only grill, but sauté, simmer, stew, and sear, just like on top of a regular burner.



And if you're really in the mood to lug stuff around (or off-load from your trunk), you can upgrade to full-on Dutch oven cooking. Like its name implies, a good quality Dutch oven is far more than just a three-legged cast iron pot with a lid—indeed, it's one of the most versatile cooking tools around.


   What to Cook in a Dutch Oven While Camping  

Hardcore campfire chefs will outfit their Dutch oven with a tripod and chain for hanging it oven above the flames, but that setup is largely unnecessary. With careful heating and planning, you can legitimately bake in it, even directly in a fire pit. Biscuits and no-knead bread are my go-to's. No-knead bread is virtually made for camping. Just mix up the dough the night before, heat your Dutch oven with the morning's first fire, and have hot, fresh bread ready in time for brunch.



Flip the lid over and set it on the coals, and you've got yourself a nice, virtually non-stick griddle perfect for eggs and bacon. I like to simmer sausages or hot dogs in beer and sauerkraut in the main pot then transfer them to the overturned lid to give them a nice brown sear just before serving.



But its true purpose, the Dutch oven's real raison d'être, is for slow-cooking. With its heavy lid, thick walls, and ability to be heated from both above and below, it's custom-designed for braising projects like chunky chili and slow-cooked beans.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Just like cooking at home, the key to great chili (and to you hard-liners, when I say chili, I'm using the much broader meat-and-beans-with-chili-based-aromatics definition of the word) is to build up flavor in layers. This means browning the meat, adding aromatics, blooming spices, and finally simmering everything until they get real comfortable with each other.


   How to Build A Fire for Dutch Oven Cooking  

The ideal fire for Dutch oven cooking is one that has a large supply of glowing, ash-covered embers. Live logs burn fast and hot, while embers are perfect for maintaining the slower, steady heat you want for Dutch oven cooking.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Unless you have a tripod to hang it from, clear out a large section of your fire pit and line it with a layer of hot coals.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Preheat the base of your Dutch oven directly on the hot coals until its smoking hot.


   Making Dutch Oven Chili  

Sear your meat in a single layer, letting it sit for a few moments at a time to encourage good browning and flavor development. You can use whatever meat you'd like for chili, but here I'm using pork shoulder.



After your meat has been seared, remove it and set it aside, then add your flavorings. In this case, I'm flavoring my meat with... more meat. Homemade venison chorizo, to be precise. If you go with only one meat, there's no reason to remove before adding the aromatics.



After everything is nice and aromatic, you can add your soaked dry beans, water, tomatoes, and a bit of salt (remember, the liquid reduces, so go easy on the salt until the end).



Depending on how long I've got before dinner time, I'll vary the amount of coal above and beneath the pot. Ideally, I'll let it cook at a sub-simmer for 6 hours or more until the beans are creamy and the meat is falling apart. Higher heat can get you a hot meal in 3 hours or less. The best way to judge how fast you're cooking is to take a peek.



Carefully lift up the hot lid and check on the contents. If you're boiling vigorously, you want to remove some coals from underneath. I check mine every few hours to make sure that it's maintaining temperature, and that the water level hasn't dropped so low that the beans and meat are beginning to burn.



The best part about a Dutch oven meal is that it'll stay hot and ready to serve for hours. Just carefully pull the pot out of the firepit to a safe spot and leave it lidded with a couple of hot coals in order to keep everything toasty. You'll have enough to eat now, and a few hours later when you're half a bottle deep into the other great campfire staple: Jack Daniels.


   A Quick Note About Cast Iron  

Like all cast iron, maintenance is a little higher than with a stainless pot or pan, but significantly easier than most people make it out to be. Yes, you can get it wet (just dry it carefully). Yes, you can use soap. You can even use metal utensils or cook acidic chili in it with little to no ill effect. For more on care and maintenance, check out our guide to cast iron.




June 2011




Recipe Details
Campfire Chili in a Dutch Oven Recipe




Active
45 mins




Total
96 hrs






Serves
8
to 10 servings




Fulfill your Dutch oven's destiny by making something satisfying over an open fire.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




1 pound cannellini beans, soaked in water for at least 4 hours (see note)


2 tablespoons vegetable oil


3 pounds pork shoulder (see note) cut into 1- to 2-inch chunks


1 pound raw hot Italian or chorizo sausage, removed from casing (see note)


1 large onion, finely chopped


1 jalapeño chile, finely chopped


3 tablespoons homemade chili powder or store-bought chili powder (see note)


1 tablespoon ground cumin


2 teaspoons dried oregano


1 cup finely minced cilantro


1 (28-ounce) can crushed tomatoes


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


1/2 cup finely sliced scallions















Directions





Rinse and drain soaked beans. Heat oil in Dutch oven over hot coals until smoking. Add half of pork and cook until well-browned on all sides, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl and repeat with remaining half of pork. Transfer second batch to bowl with the first batch.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Add sausage to pot and cook, breaking it up with a wooden spoon until no longer raw. Return meat to pot with sausage and add onion, jalapeño, chili powder, cumin, oregano, and half of cilantro. Cook, stirring constantly until aromatic and onions have begun to soften, about 4 minutes.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Add soaked beans, tomatoes, enough water to cover meat and beans by 2 inches, and a large pinch of salt (it should still taste under-seasoned, as it will reduce). Place lid on Dutch oven and cover with hot coals. Allow to heat for 10 minutes then peek and check temperature. Liquid should be mildly bubbling.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Allow to cook until beans are soft and creamy and meat is completely tender, 3 to 6 hours depending on how hot you cook it (for best results, cook over very low heat for a long period of time). Check on pot as it cooks every hour or so, topping up with water as necessary. After the chili is done, season to taste with salt and pepper and stir in the remaining cilantro and scallions. Serve immediately.




   Special Equipment  

Dutch oven


   Notes  

You can use any kind of relatively fatty meat with plenty of connective tissue in it such as beef short rib or chuck, pork shoulder, or lamb shoulder.



The sausage can be any raw sausage you like the flavor of, or can be replaced with more stew meat.



Stick with medium to small beans like kidney, cannellini, garbanzo, or navy.



Store-bought chili powder can be used, but for best flavor, grind your own chile powder (or make a chile purée by cooking toasted chiles in water or chicken stock and blending).










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




764
Calories


50g 
Fat


28g 
Carbs


50g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8
to 10




Amount per serving


Calories
764


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 50g
64%


Saturated Fat 18g
88%


Cholesterol 162mg
54%


Sodium 1215mg
53%


Total Carbohydrate 28g
10%


Dietary Fiber 7g
25%


Total Sugars 7g


Protein 50g




Vitamin C 12mg
62%


Calcium 143mg
11%


Iron 7mg
37%


Potassium 1306mg
28%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Easy Oven-Cooked Pulled Pork Recipe





















Original Texas Chili Con Carne Recipe





















Traditional French Cassoulet





















Your Kitchen Needs a Dutch Oven—Here’s Why





















The Best Barbecue Beans





















Better No-Knead Bread





















The Best Camping Cooking Gear For Outdoor Adventures





















Essential Pots and Pans: The Cookware Every Kitchen Needs


























Carne Adovada (New Mexico-Style Pork With Red Chiles) Recipe





















The Food Lab Junior: Dakota’s Red Beans and Rice Recipe





















31 Quick Dinner Recipes for Your Instant Pot or Pressure Cooker





















We Tested 20 Dutch Ovens—Here Are Our Favorites





















Campfire Cooking: How To Make Chili In A Dutch Oven





















Choucroute Garnie à l'Alsacienne (Alsatian Braised Sauerkraut With Mixed Meats and Sausages) Recipe





















New Orleans–Style Red Beans and Rice Recipe





















The Best Chili Ever






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



