












Balinese Pork Satay ( Sate Babi ) With Sweet Soy Glaze and Peanut Sauce Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 








































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Grilled Pork





Indonesian





Peanuts





Pork Shoulder





Pork Mains








Balinese Pork Satay (Sate Babi) With Sweet Soy Glaze and Peanut Sauce Recipe
Charred skewers of marinated, soy-glazed pork drizzled with spicy peanut sauce.






By

J. Kenji López-Alt








 

J. Kenji López-Alt




 


 

 


 



Culinary Consultant

Kenji is the former culinary director for Serious Eats and a current culinary consultant for the site. He is also a New York Times food columnist and the author of The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated August 29, 2018


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 




Two sauces and a marinade for extra-tasty pork. .
Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt

































In This Recipe


Expand





How to Slice the Pork




Making the Spice Paste




How to Make the Dipping Sauce and Glaze




The Safest Way to Skewer the Meat




Grilling the Satays









Why It Works

Cutting the fatty pork shoulder into small pieces makes for tender meat that is plenty juicy.A single pounded spice blend forms a marinade and flavors two separate sauces.Fanning the flames continuously while cooking prevents flare-ups and keeps the fire burning hotter.


When my wife, Adri, and I spent a few months traveling through Asia, we made a pact on the very first day we got there, and it was this: If we see smoke or steam coming out of a dark alleyway, we will investigate.



That one simple rule served us well, sending us to everything from steamed buns to noodles and dumplings, but nowhere was it as useful as it was in the Singapore-Indonesia-Malaysia triangle, where satay delivers its smoke signals from nearly every alleyway you walk by.



We all know what satay is, right? Little chunks of marinated meat threaded onto bamboo skewers, grilled over coals until charred, then served with a sweet-and-spicy peanut-based dipping sauce? You'll find it in Indonesian and Malaysian restaurants around the globe, or perhaps in the appetizer section of more cosmopolitan family restaurants and buffets.



But all the Sizzling Satay With Extreme Peanut Dipping SauceTM in the world can't prepare you for the depth, variety, and sheer volume of satay you'll find in its home countries. What we know in the States is really only the tiny tip of a vast iceberg of regional variations in both preparation and sauce.












Satay sizzling over the coals at a stand in Singapore.
Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



In Sumatra, you'll find goat satay that's been braised before grilling, and in Melaka, bright-yellow satay made with chicken skin. In Bali, you'll get minced-pork satay flavored with coconut and chiles and grilled on lemongrass, and in Singapore, sweet and savory prawn satay with a mild, chunky peanut sauce.



I've had a tough time locating definitive sources on the exact history of satay, but most seem to agree that Arab traders in the 15th century brought it to Southeast Asia, where the Indonesian island of Java became its regional epicenter. It shares its origins with kebab and shawarma, which in turn are related to all of the skewered meats in China and India, and indeed the entire diaspora of meat-on-a-stick from the Middle East.



Nearly all satay is made with a similar technique: Tiny pieces of meat are slid onto small bamboo skewers, often with chunks of fat in between to help keep them moist during cooking. The meat is then marinated, whether that's in a sweet soy and peanut marinade, a coconut and lemongrass marinade, a dry spice rub, or a million variations in between. When a customer places an order,* the grill man grabs a handful of skewers and lines them up on a specially made grill that gets the meat to within inches of glowing-hot coals.



*Some of the lesser satay spots may pre-grill their meat and reheat to order. You want to avoid this, as it invariably results in drier meat.












A beef satay vendor in his custom boat-shaped satay cart in Jogjakarta, Indonesia.
Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Normally, this is a bad idea: Dripping fat and juices catch on fire, flare up, and leave a sooty deposit on the meat. How do the vendors avoid this?



By rapidly and continuously fanning the hot coals with a fan. More traditional spots will use a bamboo fan, though I've seen some enterprising satay cooks employing an electric fan. The fanning serves the dual purpose of not only keeping the flames away from the meat, but also helping the coals burn hotter, giving the satay a crisply charred exterior with no burnt or sooty flavors.



As the satay grills, the cook may perform a number of secondary operations: Brushing with extra sauce or oil and sprinkling with a spice mixture are both common, though not required. After the meat is finished cooking, the sticks are gathered up and placed on a plate or in a paper cone and handed over, along with either a cup or a drizzle of sauce. At every stage in the process—selecting the meat, marinating, grilling, seasoning, and saucing—variation is possible. Attempting to taste, let alone catalog, all of the variations on satay is a near-impossible task.



But that didn't stop us from trying. Adri and I stayed true to our word, following every smoke trail we came across until we'd found the source and ordered a couple of sticks for our mission. By the time we left the region a few weeks later, I'd made up my mind: I was going to re-create as many of my favorite versions as I possibly could.












Pork satay in Bali—the only place where you'll find pork in mostly-Muslim Indonesia.
Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



First on the list: the delicious pork satay I'd had at a night market on the north shore of Bali. I was a little bit tipsy from a bottle of moonshine that some locals had offered me earlier in the evening, so that may have been clouding my judgment,** but it was the most delicious satay I'd ever had. It came with not one but two different sauces—a sweet and aromatic soy sauce that was brushed on the meat as it cooked and drizzled over it right after it came off the grill, and a peanut-based curry dipping sauce spooned on top—plus a flavorful marinade. The pork was deeply charred on the exterior, but not bitter, with a crisp crust giving way to a juicy center that melted on my tongue in the way that only well-rendered pork fat can.



** And perhaps my vision. Pro tip: Don't do what I did and accept local Balinese moonshine. It has a history of causing some potentially nasty side effects.


   Pork Picks: Slicing the Pork  

Satay isn't health food, and fat is what keeps things juicy and lubricated, so for my satay, I'm using the fattiest cuts of pork I can find. I'm lucky enough to live near a Japanese market that sells Berkshire pork necks, a cut that is so rich with fat, it looks pale pink with a fatty filigree, like Kobe beef. I'm mostly telling you this to say ha ha, but don't despair! The pork shoulder you'll find at any supermarket will work perfectly well in its place.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



When cutting pieces of meat for satay, I use a three-step process. First, I cut the pork into thick steaks. Then I cut that steak into strips, and finally those strips into chunks. After cutting the steaks, it's important to cut your initial strips on a rather sharp bias. This allows you to produce strips of pork that, width for width, have much shorter lengths of tough muscle fiber, yielding a more tender result. This is especially important for tough cuts like shoulder or neck. With shoulder, you'll sometimes run into the issue of not being able to determine exactly which way the grain runs because there are a lot of crisscrossing muscle groups in there. The solution? Cut your strips on a bias, then cut those strips into chunks on a bias as well, which ensures that you shorten muscle fibers in two different dimensions.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



The other question on the meat is what size pieces to use. At some vendors and in some restaurants, you'll find satay as longer strips of meat that are threaded onto skewers individually. In other places, you'll find smaller chunks. After trying strips and chunks of varying thicknesses and lengths, I found that you get the best results with smaller chunks, threaded together as tightly as possible. This not only minimizes the length of the muscle fibers for more tenderness, but also decreases the surface-area-to-volume ratio of the skewers, preventing them from drying out before they char properly.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



The other reason to use chunks over slices is that it avoids that problem of pulling the entire piece of meat off the skewer when you're trying to get just a single bite.



Next step, the marinade and sauces.


   Making the Spice Paste, Plus a Mortar and Pestle Hat Trick  

I knew that I'd be making a marinade and two individual sauces, but those three elements also have many flavors in common, so I decided to streamline the whole process by making a single spice paste that I could use as a marinade and as the base flavor for the two sauces.



For the paste, I started by pounding together lemongrass, garlic, shallots, coriander, white pepper, and sugar with a mortar and pestle, along with a big pinch of salt to act both as seasoning and as an abrasive to help break down the aromatics. Initially, I was using a bit of ginger in there as well, but fresh turmeric is better. Like ginger, it's a rhizome, but it has a much milder, earthier flavor than ginger, which tends to be hot. Speaking of heat, I also added a few dried chiles. Pasilla chiles are not an authentic Indonesian ingredient, but they're widely available here and work well as a substitute for dried Asian chiles.



As we've found multiple times in the past, using a mortar and pestle to crush tough plant cells draws out much more flavor than chopping them in a food processor can.



It is, however, significantly more work. This is an easy problem to solve if you have a spouse, or perhaps a niece or nephew whom you want to keep occupied for a good 20 to 30 minutes, but if you're the one doing all the work, it's a little more troublesome. A good technique I've been using recently is to tag-team the spice paste with the mortar and pestle and the food processor. Start the aromatics out in the mortar and pestle to get them pounded into a rough paste and draw some great flavor out of those plant cells, then transfer the mixture to a food processor to reduce it to a fine paste.



Once I had the spice paste completed, I tossed one-third of it with the pork pieces to coat them, then turned my attention to the first of the two sauces.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt


   A Dipping Sauce and a Glaze  

Many recipes for Southeast Asian peanut dipping sauces call for peanut butter. This is a mistake. Not only does most peanut butter not have great roasted-peanut flavor, it also comes with a large amount of extra fat and sugar built into it. Extra fat and sugar are good, but I prefer being able to adjust to my own taste. (To be fair, I haven't tried this recipe with any of those fancy "natural" peanut butters, and I don't see why they wouldn't work.)



To make the peanut sauce, I pounded roasted peanuts with the mortar and pestle while I fried up another third of the spice paste in a skillet. Frying the spices for the sauce concentrated their flavors and also triggered the creation of many new flavor compounds, which gave the sauce a different sort of complexity from what I'd be getting from the charred spices of the marinade, or the simmered-spice flavor I'd be introducing to the second sauce.



Once the curry paste had bloomed, I thinned it out with a combination of tamarind juice concentrate (for sourness), fish sauce or soy sauce (for umami depth), a little bit of extra oil, and some water, letting it all simmer together until it achieved a creamy consistency. It's best to use real tamarind pulp, soaked in hot water and squeezed to get the concentrate, but jarred tamarind concentrate will do in a pinch. There's so much other stuff going on in this dish that you won't notice much difference.



The second sauce I made was a seasoned sweet soy glaze based on kecap manis, a thick and syrupy Indonesian sweet soy sauce. I combined the kecap manis with garlic, ginger, and a little sugar, then simmered it to infuse the soy sauce with flavor. To finish it off, I stirred in the remaining third of my spice paste and simmered it just a bit longer.


   Skewer the Meat, Not Your Hands  

With my two sauces made and my meat marinated, it was time to skewer and grill. If you've ever tried skewering small, fatty, slippery pieces of meat, you know that it can be tough going. I can tell you from experience that you definitely don't want to accidentally skewer a finger when it's coated in a spicy marinade and raw meat juices.



Using good, sharp skewers is a first step in accident prevention (check out our full review of skewers here). The big trick is to use something as a backing aside from your finger. I happened to have half an onion kicking around when I was skewering the meat in this photo, so that's what I used. You could just as easily use half a potato, half an apple, half a lemon; whatever is most convenient and cost-effective. Note that you'll have to either cook or discard whatever you use (nobody wants to eat a pork-stained apple).


   Keep It Hot! Grilling the Satays  

Time for the grill. You can cook these over a gas grill if you value the convenience or if that's all you've got, but, because of the high heat necessary to give them a really nice char, I do prefer charcoal in this particular application. (I've also cooked these over the sear burner on my fancy-pants Coyote Outdoor grill, and that works a treat if your grill has one.)



Whatever heat source you use, you'll need one other tool: a fanning device. That fanning device can be anything from an actual handheld fan to a stiff piece of cardboard to a Shop-Vac set on blow. So long as it can get lots of air moving, it'll do.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



I used a cardboard box top for mine. As soon as I placed the skewers over the hot coals, they started to drip rendering pork fat, causing flare-ups. But, taking my lead from the cooks in Indonesia, I was ready with that stiff piece of cardboard to start fanning.



Once the pork was cooked through and crisp around the edges, I moved it over to the cooler side of the grill so that I could brush it with sauce without worrying about flare-ups, then shifted it back over direct heat just until the sauce reduced down to a sticky glaze that coated the meat. It took only about 45 seconds.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Served with another big drizzle of the glaze and a few dollops of the peanut sauce, it was every bit as crisp, smoky, juicy, and delicious as those skewers I'd had in Bali.












Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt



Now I've just got to see my way toward making some of my own moonshine to help whet the appetite. I do happen to have a plum tree producing a glut of plums this year...




July 2016




Recipe Details
Balinese Pork Satay (Sate Babi) With Sweet Soy Glaze and Peanut Sauce Recipe




Active
2 hrs




Total
2 hrs






Serves
6
to 8 servings




Charred skewers of marinated, soy-glazed pork drizzled with spicy peanut sauce.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Spice Paste:


One (1-inch) knob fresh turmeric, peeled (about 10g), or 1 teaspoon (4g) ground turmeric


2 stalks lemongrass, bottom 4 inches only, outer layers and root removed, thinly sliced (about 80g)


8 medium cloves garlic, sliced (about 60g)


2 small shallots, sliced (about 75g)


3 whole dried pasilla or guajillo chiles, stems and seeds removed, roughly chopped (about 40g)


2 tablespoons (about 30g) palm sugar or brown sugar


2 teaspoons (about 6g) whole coriander seeds


1 tablespoon (about 9g) whole white peppercorns


Kosher salt


2 pounds (1kg) boneless pork shoulder, cut into 3/4-inch cubes


For the Glaze:


1 cup kecap manis (8 ounces; 240ml); see notes


1/4 cup sugar (about 2 ounces; 50g), plus more if needed


One (2-inch) knob ginger, roughly chopped


4 medium cloves garlic, roughly chopped


For the Dipping Sauce:


10 ounces roasted peanuts (285g; about 1 1/2 cups)


1/4 cup (60ml) vegetable or canola oil, divided


1 ounce (30g) tamarind pulp, soaked and strained (see notes), or 2 teaspoons (10ml) tamarind concentrate


1 tablespoon (15ml) kecap manis or fish sauce


Water, as necessary


Sugar, to taste















Directions





For the Spice Paste: Combine turmeric, lemongrass, garlic, shallots, chiles, sugar, coriander, white peppercorns, and 2 teaspoons (8g) kosher salt using a mortar and pestle, working in batches if necessary. Pound into a fine paste. (For an easier method, pound with the mortar and pestle until a rough paste is formed, then transfer to a food processor to reduce to a fine paste. I do not recommend using the food processor alone if you want maximum flavor.) Divide mixture into thirds.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Combine pork and one-third of spice paste in a large bowl and toss with your hands until all of pork is thoroughly coated in the mixture. Cover and refrigerate for at least 45 minutes or up to overnight. Thread pork onto skewers. To do this efficiently, cut an onion or potato in half and place it on your cutting board. Place a piece of pork on top of it and push through it with the skewer. Repeat until each skewer has about 6 inches of pork threaded onto it. Pork should be pushed together quite tightly. Discard onion half (or grill it) after use. Keep pork skewers refrigerated until ready to cook.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






For the Glaze: Meanwhile, combine kecap manis, sugar, ginger, and garlic in a small saucepan and bring to a simmer over medium-low heat. Cook until glaze is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon. Stir in one-third of spice paste and adjust seasoning with more sugar as necessary. Strain mixture through a fine-mesh strainer, using the back of a spoon to extract as much liquid as possible. Discard solids. Leftover glaze can be stored indefinitely in a covered container in the refrigerator.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






For the Dipping Sauce: Pound peanuts with the mortar and pestle until reduced to a rough powder. Heat 2 tablespoons (30ml) oil in a medium skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add remaining third of spice paste and cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add peanuts, tamarind juice, remaining oil, kecap manis or fish sauce, and 1/2 cup (120ml) water. Stir to combine. Once liquid comes to a simmer and turns creamy, adjust consistency with more water as necessary to produce a creamy sauce that just barely flows. Season to taste with a little sugar if desired. Leftover sauce can be stored for several weeks in a covered container in the refrigerator.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






To Cook: Light one chimney full of charcoal. When all the charcoal is lit and covered with gray ash, pour out and arrange coals on one side of charcoal grate. Set cooking grate in place, cover grill, and allow to preheat for 5 minutes. Alternatively, set half the burners on a gas grill to the highest heat setting, cover, and preheat for 10 minutes. Clean and oil the grilling grate.





Working in batches as necessary, place pork directly over hot side of grill. Immediately start fanning coals or flames with a large piece of cardboard or with the hose of a Shop-Vac to prevent flare-ups. Cook, fanning constantly and turning pork occasionally, until pork is cooked through and browned on all sides, about 6 minutes total. Transfer pork to cooler side of grill and brush on all sides with glaze. Return to hot side of grill and cook, turning, just until glaze starts to bubble and get sticky, about 45 seconds. Transfer skewers to a serving platter and repeat until all pork is cooked.











Serious Eats / J. Kenji López-Alt






Brush pork with another layer of glaze just before serving and serve with peanut sauce on the side or spooned on top.




   Special Equipment  

Mortar and pestle; bamboo or metal skewers (soak bamboo skewers in water for 30 minutes before using); a stiff piece of cardboard, a fan, or a Shop-Vac; food processor (optional); fine-mesh strainer, charcoal grill


   Notes  

To soak and strain tamarind pulp, combine 2 tablespoons (30g) pulp with 2 tablespoons (30ml) warm water and massage with your fingertips until softened. Press through a fine-mesh strainer. Keep the juice and discard the remaining pulp.



Kecap manis is a sweet Indonesian soy sauce that can be found in most Asian markets.


   Read More  

How to Get Started Grilling
How to Set Up Your Grill for Better Skewers, Kebabs, and Yakitori










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




488
Calories


28g 
Fat


52g 
Carbs


15g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 6
to 8




Amount per serving


Calories
488


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 28g
36%


Saturated Fat 4g
20%


Cholesterol 9mg
3%


Sodium 1641mg
71%


Total Carbohydrate 52g
19%


Dietary Fiber 6g
20%


Total Sugars 34g


Protein 15g




Vitamin C 4mg
22%


Calcium 73mg
6%


Iron 3mg
17%


Potassium 662mg
14%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Easy Vegan Crispy Tofu Spring Rolls





















23 Grilled Chicken Recipes to Devour on July Fourth





















18 Kebab Recipes for Labor Day





















Moo Ping (Thai-Style Grilled Pork Skewers) Recipe





















Thai-Style Chicken Satay With Peanut-Tamarind Dipping Sauce Recipe





















Thit Heo Nuong Xa (Vietnamese Grilled Lemongrass Pork Chops)





















Skewer This: 19 Kickass Kebabs for Your Cookout





















Vietnamese Grilled Pork Chops With Chilled Rice Noodles Recipe


























Moo Palo (Thai Pork Belly Stew With Eggs)





















22 Grilled Beef Recipes for the Ultimate Memorial Day Cookout





















A Guide to Thai-Style Salads





















Homemade Tacos Al Pastor





















Kofte Kebabs With Spicy Harissa Yogurt Sauce and Grilled Flatbread (Minced Lamb Kebabs) Recipe





















The Turkey Club Shawarma Sandwich With Pork Belly and Enhanced Mayo Recipe





















Pinchos Morunos (Moorish Skewers)





















Nigerian Beef Suya (Spiced Grilled Skewers) Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



