












Microwave Rocky Road Sponge Cakes Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































 













































 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Cakes





Chocolate








Microwave Rocky Road Sponge Cakes Recipe
We use a microwave to make lighter-than-air sponge cakes packed with three forms of chocolate, marshmallows, and toasted walnuts.






By

Ideas in Food








 

Ideas in Food




 


 

 


 

 


 



Contributors

Aki Kamozawa and Alex Talbot are the voices behind the website Ideas in Food and the bakery Curiosity Doughnuts. They are chefs, food writers, photographers, educators, and culinary consultants, and they are here to make your food better.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated December 20, 2023


























































WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Serious Eats / Ideas in Food

































Why It Works

We love using our microwave. In addition to baking the cakes in the microwave, we use it to dry out and "roast" them. This technique intensifies their natural flavor and gives them a light crisp texture.We mix the batter in a food processor, adding a splash of bourbon for added flavor, and then process in the nuts and marshmallow. The marshmallows provide extra leavening for the cakes.We portion the cake batter into paper cups that have been vented to allow steam to escape.


Microwave cakes have now become mainstream. Sort of. They were invented by Albert Adria. He used a whipped cream dispenser and a microwave to make almost instant light-as-air cakes. The technique has been adapted and adopted by chefs and home cooks around the world. It's a favorite of ours and we have formulated a number of recipes, from Danish to cornbread.



The problem? Each time we published a new recipe, a reader would complain about the use of the whipped cream canister. While many gear-heads and serious home cooks have one, they're just not as common as the food media would like us to believe. They also have their limitations: You can't make a microwave sponge cake with any sort of chunky inclusions when using the canister.



We decided that there had to be a way to make these cakes without using the gadget.



We thought about soufflé cakes, how they have a similar light and airy texture, but are softer and less stable than microwave sponge cakes. Soufflé cakes are lightened with whipped egg whites. So we set about making a microwave cake using a hybrid meringue as our leavening. Alex had a craving for Rocky Road so we decided to use that as the flavor base giving us the extra challenge of how to add inclusions like marshmallow, toasted nuts, and chocolate to the cake while changing the base recipe.



To make our cakes, we start by toasting walnuts in the microwave. It's a really easy method and results in more even toasting than on the stovetop and is faster than toasting in the oven.



Next, we melt a combination of dark and white chocolate by running it in the food processor, letting the heat of friction do the work for us. A little bit of peanut oil adds some tenderness to the cakes and brown sugar lends flavor as well as some moisture-retention properties.












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



Next we add flour, cocoa powder, salt, and powdered egg whites to the base and blend it up again. Finally, 3 egg yolks, milk, and a splash of bourbon get blended in until a fully smooth batter is formed.












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



After making this rich batter, our plan was to fold it into a whipped egg white mixture for leavening.



In the process of testing this we discovered something really interesting. Our first round of cakes was seriously dense, until we folded in miniature marshmallows. When we microwaved the cakes with the marshmallows, they expanded and pushed the rising cake batter up and out of the cups. They provided steam leavening and created huge holes in the finished cake. Not ideal results, but really interesting and worth exploring.












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



We adapted this idea and instead of using whole marshmallows and nuts, we decided to pulse some into the batter to chop them up a little more finely. The inclusions add gooey texture, sweet flavors, and additional leavening. Turns out that the miniature marshmallows are the macro-leaveners in our micro cakes.



The rest is pretty straightforward. We whip a few egg whites in a stand mixer until frothy, then we add some powdered sugar and keep whipping until stiff glossy peaks form.



To this we add our chocolate base...












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



...and start very gently folding it in.












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



The key here is to combine the two elements without deflating the whipped whites—the inclusion of plenty of air is what keeps these cakes light and tender.



The very best part about these little cakes? They don't require any special baking equipment beyond little paper cups. To bake them, just poke a hole in the bottom of a paper cup along with three small holes around the perimeter for venting.












Serious Eats / Ideas in Food



Pour the batter into the cup, and microwave them for just 45 seconds. They come out light as air, puffy, and moist, and while they're great eaten hot out of the microwave, we actually think they have the best flavor when eaten at room temperature.




October 2014




Recipe Details
Microwave Rocky Road Sponge Cakes Recipe




Prep
20 mins




Cook
25 mins




Active
20 mins




Total
45 mins






Makes
20 small cakes




We use a microwave to make lighter-than-air sponge cakes packed with three forms of chocolate, marshmallows, and toasted walnuts.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   



100g walnut halves


150g 60% dark chocolate chips


150g white chocolate chips


50g dark brown sugar


50g peanut oil or walnut oil


50g all-purpose flour


50g cocoa powder


18g powdered egg whites


3g salt


3 large eggs, separated


175g whole milk


30g Knob Creek Bourbon, or your favorite


100g powdered sugar


100g miniature marshmallows














Directions





Put the walnuts in an even layer on a microwave-safe plate. Microwave the walnuts for 1 minute. Stir the walnuts on the plate and microwave for 1 minute longer. Stir the walnuts again and continue to microwave the walnuts in 1-minute intervals for a total of 5 minutes. Let the walnuts cool on the plate.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Put the dark chocolate, white chocolate, brown sugar, and peanut oil into a food processor. Process until the chocolate melts and the mixture is smooth, about 3 minutes.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Add the flour, cocoa powder, powdered egg whites, and salt into the food processor and pulse the mixture 10 times to blend the ingredients, about 12 seconds total.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Add the 3 egg yolks, milk, and bourbon to the food processor and process until it forms a smooth batter, about 1 minute. Stop and scrape down the sides once during this process.





Add the walnuts and miniature marshmallows into the food processor and pulse 10 times, about 12 seconds, until they are minced and mixed into the batter.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Whip the 3 large egg whites on medium in a stand mixer with the whisk for 2 minutes, until they begin to get frothy. Remove the bowl from the mixer and sift the powdered sugar over the egg whites. Return to the stand mixer and whip the mixture on medium speed until it forms stiff, glossy peaks, about 5 minutes. Remove the bowl from the mixer and knock any egg white that clings to the whisk back into the bowl.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Use a rubber spatula to scrape the chocolate batter into the bowl of whipped egg whites and then fold them together to form a light, uniform batter. This takes about 30 seconds.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food






Use a pairing knife to poke a hole in the bottom of each paper cup and 3 holes evenly around the circumference of the cup. Reserve the cups. Don’t worry; the batter will not seep out through the holes. Put 2 ounces (4 tablespoons) of batter into each cup. We use an ice-cream scoop to do this. Microwave 1 cake at a time for 45 seconds on high power. Remove the cake from the microwave and immediately invert it onto a heatproof tray. Continue to microwave the remaining cakes until they are all cooked. The cakes can be eaten warm, room temperature, or refrigerated. We think they have the best flavor at room temperature. They will stay fresh for up to 3 days refrigerated inverted.











Serious Eats / Ideas in Food





   Special Equipment  

Microwave, food processor, stand mixer with whisk attachment, 10-ounce paper cups


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

The cakes can be stored upside-down in their cups on a plate or tray in the refrigerator for up to 3 days.


   Read More  

5 Minute Fudgy Chocolate Microwave Cake
Microwave Mocha Mug Cake
Chocolate Soufflé
Baked Chocolate Mousse Cake
Microwave Shortcuts Every Home Cook Should Know







































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Ideas in Food: Use the Microwave to Make Lighter-Than-Air Rocky Road Sponge Cake





















Honey-Vanilla Almond Cake





















17 Cake Recipes





















19 Rosh Hashanah Desserts to Guarantee a Sweet New Year





















No-Bake Dessert Recipes





















We Tested 11 Stand Mixers—Four Stood Out Above the Rest





















20 Quick and Easy Dessert Recipes





















Flourless Chocolate Lava Cakes Recipe


























22 July 4th Dessert Recipes You'll Find Room For (We Promise)





















23 Baking Recipes, No Stand Mixer Required





















How to Scale a Recipe for Cake to Fit Any Pan





















Classic Chocolate Yule Log Recipe





















We Tested 16 Immersion Blenders—Here Are Our Favorites





















19 July 4th Dessert Recipes You'll Find Room For (We Promise)





















30 Christmas Cookies to Spread the Holiday Cheer





















15 Sweet Cinnamon Recipes to Spice Up Your Life






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



