












Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe
























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 













































 



 



































































 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us





















Fats & Oils





Christmas Cookies





Chocolate





Olive Oil








Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe
This vegan chocolate chip cookie recipe relies on a short list of basic pantry staples (hey, chocolate chips are staples!), so be sure to reach for extra-virgin olive oil and chocolate you absolutely love.






By

Stella Parks








 

Stella Parks




 


 

 


 

 


 



Editor Emeritus

Stella Parks is a CIA-trained baking nerd and pastry wizard, dubbed one of America's Best New Pastry Chefs by Food & Wine. She was the pastry editor at Serious Eats from 2016 to 2019.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated April 15, 2020

























































(11)


WRITE A REVIEW






print
















Trending Videos














 

Photograph: Vicky Wasik

































Why It Works

The rich flavor and color of extra-virgin olive oil give these cookies their distinctive character.In a dough made with liquid oil, brown sugar works to keep the cookies nice and thick.An oat slurry provides water, protein, and emulsification, much like a whole egg, but with a subtle flavor that blends seamlessly with the dough.The varied shapes and cacao percentages in an assortment of chocolate chips provide more depth of flavor to the dough.


These vegan chocolate chip cookies get their color and richness from extra-virgin olive oil, which lends its unique flavor to the dough and underscores the bittersweet earthiness of chocolate chips. (See the note at the bottom of this page for guidance on choosing an olive oil.) The cookies bake up crisp around the edges, with a soft and chewy center, but feel free to bake them more or less for a crisper or softer texture instead.



Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies: Just Pantry Staples, Totally Vegan




Recipe Details
Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe




Active
About 15 mins




Total
30 mins






Serves
18 cookies




This vegan chocolate chip cookie recipe relies on a short list of basic pantry staples (hey, chocolate chips are staples!), so be sure to reach for extra-virgin olive oil and chocolate you absolutely love.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   


For the Oat Slurry:


1 1/2 ounces old-fashioned rolled oats (about 1/2 cup minus 2 1/2 teaspoons; 42g), not quick-cooking or instant


3 ounces water (about 1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon; 85g)


For the Dough:


6 ounces light brown sugar (about 3/4 cup, gently packed; 170g)


3/4 teaspoon baking soda


3/4 teaspoon (3g) Diamond Crystal kosher salt; for table salt, use about half as much by volume or the same weight


1/2 teaspoon baking powder


1/8 teaspoon ground cinnamon


4 3/4 ounces extra-virgin olive oil (about 2/3 cup; 135g); see note


2 ounces prepared oat slurry


1/4 ounce vanilla extract (about 1 1/2 teaspoons; 7g)


6 3/4 ounces all-purpose flour (about 1 1/2 cups, spooned; 190g)


6 ounces assorted chocolate chips or chopped chocolate; see note















Directions





For the Oat Slurry: In a tall, narrow container just wide enough to accommodate the head of an immersion blender, combine rolled oats and water. Using an immersion blender, purée until thick and smooth, then strain through a fine-mesh strainer, pressing on the solids with a flexible spatula until they give up all their liquid. Discard the fibrous oat solids and reserve 2 ounces of the thick and gooey purée to use as directed below. This step should not be done in advance, as the oat slurry will continue to thicken over time, eventually becoming unusable.





For the Dough: Adjust oven rack to middle position and preheat oven to 350°F (180°C). In a large bowl, whisk brown sugar, baking soda, salt, baking powder, and cinnamon until very well combined and free of any major lumps, about 1 minute. Add olive oil, prepared oat slurry, and vanilla extract and whisk until smooth. Add flour and stir, using a flexible spatula, until well absorbed, then add chocolate chips and knead by hand to incorporate. The dough will seem a touch oily and strange; this is normal.





Portion the Dough: Using a 2-tablespoon cookie scoop, divide dough into about 18 pieces, firmly compressing each portion into the scoop using the palm of your hand or the edge of the bowl. (If you like, the portioned dough can be refrigerated in a heavy-duty zipper-lock bag for up to 1 week, or frozen for up to 6 months. Let stand at room temperature until quite soft, about 70°F/21°C, then bake as directed.)





To Bake: Arrange portioned dough on a parchment-lined aluminum baking sheet, leaving 2 inches between portions. If you like, garnish with a few extra chocolate chips on each cookie. Bake until cookies are puffed and golden from edge to center and firm around the edges but still quite steamy and soft in the middle, about 15 minutes. Cool directly on baking sheet until the crumb has set. Enjoy warm or at room temperature. Store leftovers in an airtight container up to 3 days at cool room temperature.




   Special Equipment  

Immersion blender, nonreactive fine-mesh strainer, flexible spatula, 2-tablespoon cookie scoop (optional), half-sheet pans


   Notes  

The flavor and aroma of these cookies depend entirely on the quality of the olive oil, so be sure to use a brand with a flavor you absolutely love. This recipe can be used as a showcase for any style of olive oil so long as it's one you enjoy, but for the most "traditional" chocolate chip cookie, try an extra-virgin olive oil with a mild and buttery profile, rather than one that's peppery or sharp. For more information, see our guide to buying olive oil.



If olive oil isn’t your jam, regardless of how mild it may be, this recipe works equally well with hazelnut oil—which you might have left over from making our homemade Nutella.



For more information on selecting an assortment of chips, see our chocolate chip buying guide for recommendations. Chopped chocolate bars can be used in place of commercial chips, a swap that gives the chocolate a more assertive presence in the dough; I recommend using a similar assortment of cacao percentages and styles. See our top picks for supermarket chocolate bars for more information.


   Make-Ahead and Storage  

The portioned dough can be refrigerated in a heavy-duty zipper-lock bag for up to 1 week, or frozen for up to 6 months. Let stand at room temperature until quite soft, about 70°F (21°C), then bake as directed. Leftover cookies may be stored in an airtight container for up to 3 days at cool room temperature.


  This Recipe Appears In  

Olive Oil Chocolate Chip Cookies: Just Pantry Staples, Totally Vegan










Nutrition Facts (per serving)




202
Calories


11g 
Fat


25g 
Carbs


2g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 18




Amount per serving


Calories
202


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 11g
14%


Saturated Fat 3g
14%


Cholesterol 1mg
0%


Sodium 136mg
6%


Total Carbohydrate 25g
9%


Dietary Fiber 1g
4%


Total Sugars 14g


Protein 2g




Vitamin C 0mg
0%


Calcium 24mg
2%


Iron 1mg
8%


Potassium 86mg
2%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















Quick and Easy Chocolate Chip Cookies | BraveTart





















Homemade Chipwiches Recipe





















Vegan Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Vegan Lactation Cookies Recipe





















Chocolate Chip Skillet Cookie Recipe





















Tate's-Style Thin and Crispy Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Vegan Chocolate-Covered Digestive Biscuits (Vegan McVities)





















Cookies 'n' Cream Cookies Recipes | BraveTart


























Lactation Cookies Recipe





















Levain Bakery-Style Super-Thick Chocolate Chip Cookies Recipe





















Pommes Dauphine





















Olive Oil Cake





















Malted Chocolate Chip-Pecan Cookies Recipe





















How to Perfect Vegan Chocolate Chip Cookies, One Ingredient at a Time





















Essential Baking Ingredients for Cake, Cookies, Breads, and More





















Dairy-Free Chocolate Cake Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



