












Classic Lasagna Bolognese Recipe

























































 




 



 

































































 







 







 







































 



































 




















 























 



















 



















































 




















 












































 









































 




















 













































 







 







 























 



 


















 



















​ 

 


Skip to Content









Close search





Search






Search










button





button







 Recipes






Recipes by Course


Recipes by Ingredient


Recipes by Cuisine


Recipes by Method


Recipes by Diet


Recipes by Holiday & Season


 View all
 



 How-Tos






Techniques


Tips & Troubleshooting


Grilling Guides


Stovetop Guides


Baking Guides


Entertaining


The Food Lab


 View all
 



 World Cuisines






African Cuisines


Asian Cuisines


Caribbean Cuisines


Central American Cuisines


European Cuisines


Middle Eastern Cuisines


North American Cuisine Guides


Oceanic Cuisines


South American Cuisines


 View all
 



 Ingredients






Chicken Guides


Drink Guides


Egg Guides


Fruit Guides


Noodle Guides


Pantry Guides


Pork Guides


Rice & Grain Guides


Seafood Guides


Vegetable Guides


Taste Tests


 View all
 



 Equipment






Coffee & Tea


Cookware


Knives


Tools & Gadgets


Grilling & Outdoor


Electric Appliances


Seriously Good Gear


Bakeware


Kitchen Basics


Storage & Organization


Barware


Tableware


Books


Seasonal & Gifts


 View all
 



 Features






Dining Out


Food History


Food Industry


Food Science


Personal Essays


 View all
 



 About Us
 




Newsletter







Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.



Congrats, you’re signed up!







































Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.






About Us


Contact Us




















Recipes





Recipes By Ingredients





Pastas





Lasagna




Classic Lasagna Bolognese
Homemade ragù Bolognese and creamy besciamella, layered with sheets of pasta.






By

Daniel Gritzer








 

Daniel Gritzer




 


 

 


 

 


 



Senior Culinary Director

Daniel joined the Serious Eats culinary team in 2014 and writes recipes, equipment reviews, articles on cooking techniques. Prior to that he was a food editor at Food & Wine magazine, and the staff writer for Time Out New York's restaurant and bars section.



Learn about Serious Eats'
Editorial Process




Updated October 26, 2023
























































(6)



WRITE A REVIEW






Print













































In This Recipe


Expand





What Is Lasagna Bolognese?




Choosing the Pasta




Making the Ragù




A Creamy Besciamella




Assembly and Baking









Why It Works

A choice of hearty ragù recipes lets you choose the final flavor of the dish.Thin layers of ragù coat each layer of pasta with just the right amount of sauce.The creamy besciamella is easy to drizzle onto each layer, but will also reach the perfect consistency after baking.


Here in the United States, when most people say they're going to make lasagna, they almost always mean the baked dish of wide noodles with thick layers of ricotta cheese, mozzarella, and either tomato or meat sauce. But that limited use of the term doesn't begin to capture the vast possibilities of lasagna as it's prepared in Italy, and in particular, the king of all lasagnas: lasagna Bolognese.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik


   What Is Lasagna Bolognese?  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



The word itself, lasagna, technically refers only to the noodles—broad, flat, and rectangular—which is why Italians almost always use the plural, lasagne. Lasagne are also among the most ancient of pasta shapes, a fact that makes sense when you consider that they're literally the starting point for so many other kinds of pasta: You have to make lasagne before you can cut something like fettuccine or pappardelle from them.



Given their antiquity, there are probably 50 lasagna recipes for every square inch of Italian soil,* and not all of them are layered and baked.



*Do not quote me on that.



In Liguria, for instance, the lasagne are rolled out so thin that they're nearly see-through when cooked, then tossed with pesto. Sure, they call them mandilli de saea (or fazzoletti di seta), a reference to the silken handkerchiefs the pasta resembles, but they're lasagne all the same.



In Naples, meanwhile, you're likely to find lasagne alla Napoletana, a wonderfully over-the-top baked version stuffed with every goody you can imagine.



The kind I crave the most, though, is lasagne alla Bolognese, hailing from Emilia-Romagna in north-central Italy. It's a fundamentally simple recipe, with only a few key components: the pasta; the meat sauce, known as ragù Bolognese; besciamella (a.k.a. béchamel or white sauce); and grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.



Despite its hearty frame, the true beauty of lasagna Bolognese is its refined delicacy. The layers are not overstuffed, guaranteeing that the pasta (and your mouth) isn't steamrolled by the filling's intense richness.



There's no ricotta in it, no mozzarella, no wads of spinach leaves, chunks of mushroom, or other heavy add-ins that you often find in other lasagna recipes.



Instead, the texture is silken, the result of layers of delicate fresh pasta and long-cooked, gelatin-infused ragù, all gently bound by creamy besciamella. And the flavor, while robust and meaty, has a hint of sweetness to it, a gift from all the carb- and dairy-rich components (along with the judicious use of nutmeg).



It's about as close to perfection as any baked pasta I've ever eaten, and, while you're free to stuff it with additional ingredients if you so choose, I'd beg you to at least try it in its most basic form first, because I honestly don't think it wants for anything.



Making it work requires being thoughtful about each component—like many of Italy's best dishes, lasagna Bolognese is relatively simple, meaning bad technique and inadvisable shortcuts don't have much to hide behind.


   Choosing the Type of Pasta  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Many experts, including Italian food authority Marcella Hazan, tell you that if you aren't willing to make your own fresh lasagna noodles from scratch, you shouldn't bother making the dish at all. I don't agree with that. While homemade fresh lasagne, rolled from an egg-enriched dough, may produce the apex of the dish, they shouldn't be a requirement. (In fact, Kenji even calls for dry no-boil lasagna noodles in his lasagna recipe.)



First, you can buy pretty decent fresh (or frozen) lasagna noodles at a lot of supermarkets now, leading to inarguably delicious results. And, frankly, while it's not the same, even dried pasta can work in a pinch—the pasta in a lasagna should be cooked past the point of al dente anyway, so that you can slide a fork through it without much resistance, and dried pasta lends itself to that kind of overcooking nearly as well as fresh.



If you're up for making the pasta from scratch, you should start by reading about Niki's in-depth testing of fresh-pasta dough, in which she dialed in to the sweet spot (to the degree that such can exist) for a basic flour-and-egg dough. You can follow either her regular pasta recipe or her spinach-enhanced recipe. Spinach pasta is technically the most traditional choice for lasagna Bolognese, but I don't consider it any more of a requirement than a homemade dough.



One of the advantages of making your own pasta is that you can control just how thin the sheets are. With lasagna Bolognese, the thinner the better, at least to a point. I'd suggest rolling the sheets out to about the 6 or 7 setting on your pasta machine—thin enough that the pasta layers aren't needlessly bulky, but not quite so thin that they reach Ligurian silk-handkerchief levels. Once they're rolled out, cut the long sheets into more manageable rectangular lengths of about eight inches or so.



To prep the pasta, I cook it in salted boiling water until it's just done, with only a hint of resilience left when you chew it (it'll soften up more in the oven). I then chill the noodles in a bath of ice water, drain them well, and rub each one lightly with oil to prevent them from sticking. If you're going to be holding the cooked pasta for any length of time, I'd suggest laying the oiled sheets out on a parchment-lined baking sheet with layers of plastic wrap between them—once again, to prevent sticking.


   Making the Ragù Bolognese  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Next up is the ragù Bolognese, and we here at Serious Eats have you covered on that front in more ways than one. Bolognese is a meat sauce most often made with beef, and sometimes pork and/or veal; lamb is not an unheard-of addition.



While there are probably as many recipes for Bolognese sauce as there are for lasagna, it always starts with a soffritto, a sautéed mixture of aromatic vegetables like onion, carrot, and celery. When it's raw, the Italians call this chopped-up vegetable mixture a battuto, which translates as "beaten" and harkens back to a time when they'd crush all the aromatics to a rough paste with a mortar and pestle. For this reason, I tend to opt for a well-minced battuto, which I do by hand (because I'm a little nuts), but you can easily do it much more quickly in a food processor. I like the way the finer mince mostly disappears among the bits of meat in the sauce.



Beyond the soffritto and the meat, Bolognese often has a small amount of tomato, either puréed or in the form of paste—though not so much as to make it a full-on tomato-meat sauce—as well as wine (red or white, but always dry... and don't worry too much about the quality), plus a hint of warm spices like nutmeg and a good splash of milk or cream, which creates a silky and luxurious final texture.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



You can choose from a variety of recipes for this. First, there's Kenji's slow-cooked version, which is about as tricked-out as you can get. Among the cooler elements of his recipe is the inclusion of pancetta, lamb, and chicken livers for added richness and depth; he also cooks the sauce in the oven instead of on the stovetop, which takes longer but leads to deep flavor and a more tender texture, thanks to a combination of gentle heat and surface browning.



Kenji has also published a pressure cooker Bolognese recipe, which is a great time-saver that doesn't sacrifice much in terms of quality. If you have a pressure cooker, it's definitely worth considering.



I've also written my own Bolognese recipe, just for this lasagna. It's a little simpler than Kenji's, both for slightly more ease and to hit a specific flavor profile I'm after—playing up those sweet dairy notes and reducing some of the funky intensity from the pancetta, chicken livers, and lamb. Mine is not a quick and easy recipe by any measure, though if you do it on the stovetop, it takes three, maybe four hours. You can also pop it in the oven à la Kenji's approach, which will yield some subtle improvements in flavor and texture, but will also likely take an hour or two longer.



It takes some time, but the sauce freezes well, making it a component you can prepare in advance at your leisure, and then defrost whenever you want to layer into a lasagna (or serve on fresh tagliatelle noodles).



There are a couple key steps in all our ragù recipes. One is to add unflavored gelatin to the chicken stock before adding it to the pot, especially if you're using store-bought broth, which lacks the gelatin that a good homemade stock always has. The gelatin is important because it delivers that rich, mouth-coating viscosity that separates the best sauces from all the wimpy, watery ones. Using some ground veal in the Bolognese, incidentally, also ups the gelatin factor.



The other is to brown only a portion of the ground meat, or start with the meat in larger chunks for browning and then grind it after that. The reason is that browning delivers excellent flavor development, but sacrifices texture by drying the browned bits out excessively—browning requires drying, so there's no good way around this. By browning only some of the meat, we get that excellent depth of roasted flavor, but we reserve a more tender texture in the remaining portion of un-browned meat. It's a win-win.


   The Best Way to Prepare Besciamella for Lasagna  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Aside from the grated parm, besciamella is the most basic of all the components in a lasagna Bolognese, but its importance shouldn't be underestimated. It's the indulgently creamy sauce that binds the whole thing together, helping to marry the meaty sauce with the silky sheets of pasta while underscoring the rich dairy in the dish and bringing out that warm nutmeg spice (which is in both the ragù and the besciamella).



The secret to getting it right is to make a version with the proper ratio of flour to milk, which in this case means less flour for a thinner white sauce. That's because the besciamella will thicken up as the lasagna bakes, so if you start with a thicker sauce, it'll end up gluey by the time the lasagna comes out of the oven. I use a ratio of a little more than one tablespoon of flour per cup of milk. The resulting besciamella will be easy to drizzle onto each layer, but will reach the perfect, slowly flowing consistency after baking.



Aside from that, the method is classic. Melt butter in a saucepan, whisk in flour to form a paste, then cook until the flour's raw smell has cooked off, but not so much that it starts to brown. After that, drizzle in the milk slowly, whisking well the whole time, to prevent lumps and ensure a truly silky, smooth sauce.



One thing to watch out for: Besciamella has a tendency to rapidly develop a thick skin on the top as it sits; you can prevent this by pressing some plastic wrap against the surface. Then just keep it warm until you're ready to use it.


   Assembling and Baking Your Lasagna  

With all the components prepared, all that's left is to assemble and bake the lasagna.


  Step 1: Butter Baking Dish, Then Begin Layering Ragù and Pasta  

Start by buttering a baking dish (9 by 13 inches works for my recipe), then put down a thin layer of ragù, just to underpin the first layer of pasta. Now cover the ragù with sheets of pasta; some overlap is totally fine, but you can cut the pasta as needed to avoid too much doubling up.


  Step 2: Layer on More Ragù, Pasta, Besciamella, and Cheese  

Next, add another thin layer of ragù, followed by a drizzling of besciamella and a grating of Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.


  Step 3: Repeat Until Baking Dish Is Full  

Repeat this layering sequence until the baking dish is filled up; that was about six layers total for me.



Sauce Tip:



The most important thing is to not go too thick on the meat sauce, as tempting as it may be. Each individual layer should be thin, since it will add up as each one is stacked atop the last; if you do it right, the pasta will be sauced in roughly similar proportions to an unbaked pasta dish (i.e., not too much sauce). Excessive sauce will do nothing but drown out the pasta and reduce the structural integrity of the layers once the lasagna is cut and plated. (Anyone who wants the sauce that badly should just skip all this trouble and eat it from a bowl with a spoon. There's no shame in that.)


  Step 4: Finish With Besciamella and Cheese  










Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



Once you've reached the top layer of pasta, spread the remaining besciamella on it, without any more ragù, then shower it with a final dose of grated cheese.


  Step 5: Bake the Lasagna  

The whole thing can go into a 375°F (190°C) oven until it's bubbling and browned on top, about 35 minutes. Then let it rest at least another 10 minutes or so, so that it can set slightly and will hold together better once you cut into it.












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik



It may not reach towering heights, or overflow with thick layers of cheese, but it more than holds its own in the pantheon of lasagnas—I mean, who can argue with the fact that there's more than one way to keep things interesting between the sheets?












Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik




December 2016




Recipe Details
Classic Lasagna Bolognese




Prep
15 mins




Cook
65 mins




Active
40 mins




Total
80 mins






Serves
8 servings




Homemade ragù Bolognese and creamy besciamella, layered with sheets of pasta.


Save









Print







   Ingredients   




4 tablespoons unsalted butter (2 ounces; 60g), plus more for greasing baking dish


4 tablespoons all-purpose flour (1.25 ounces; 35g)


3 cups (700ml) whole milk


Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper


Pinch freshly grated nutmeg


2 pounds (900g) fresh homemade plain egg or spinach pasta or store-bought fresh lasagna noodles, or 2 (450g) boxes dry lasagna noodles (see notes)


Vegetable oil, for greasing pasta


 1 1/2 quarts (1.5L) warm ragù Bolognese (choose either this classic slow-cooked version, this extra-rich oven-baked version, or this pressure-cooker version)


3 ounces (85g) Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese















Directions





In a small saucepan, melt butter over medium-high heat (do not allow it to brown). Add flour and whisk to form a paste. Continue to cook, stirring, until raw flour scent is gone, about 1 minute. Whisking constantly, add milk in a thin, steady stream, or in increments of a couple of tablespoons at a time, whisking thoroughly and getting into all corners of the pan to maintain a homogeneous texture. Sauce will initially become very thick, then get very thin once all the milk is added.





Heat, stirring, until sauce comes to a simmer and begins to thicken slightly. Reduce heat to low and cook, stirring, until sauce is just thick enough to coat the back of a wooden spoon, about 3 minutes.





Season with salt and pepper. Whisk in nutmeg. If any lumps form, simply whisk thoroughly to remove them and smooth out sauce, or use a hand blender or countertop blender if lumps are particularly large or tough. Use béchamel sauce right away, or press a piece of plastic wrap over surface of sauce to prevent a skin from forming and keep warm until ready to use. (Béchamel sauce can be cooled and stored in a sealed container in the refrigerator for several days. Reheat very gently on the stovetop or in a microwave to use.)





If Using Homemade Pasta: Follow the recipe and instructions here through step 10 (you will end up with long sheets of fresh pasta), doubling the quantity to yield 2 pounds total (this will make more pasta than you will need, but it's best to have extra and avoid running out midway through assembly). Cut those sheets into roughly 8-inch-long rectangles.





In a pot of salted boiling water, cook pasta, working in batches if necessary, until al dente (this will vary depending on the pasta you use, but for store-bought it's about 1 minute less than package instructions), then use a spider or mesh strainer to transfer immediately to a large ice bath to cool.





Drain pasta well, then rub each sheet lightly on both sides with vegetable oil (to prevent sticking). You can hold the cooked pasta sheets for up to 3 hours, but if you're doing this, it's best to lay them out on a parchment-lined baking sheet, with layers of plastic wrap between the layers of pasta (once again, to prevent sticking).











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






If Using No-Boil Pasta: Soak in warm water for 30 minutes to partially hydrate, then drain on paper towels or kitchen towels.





To assemble and bake lasagna, preheat oven to 375°F (190°C). Grease a 9- by 13-inch baking dish with butter. Spoon a thin, even layer of ragù on bottom of baking dish, then lay down a layer of lasagna noodles; it's okay if they overlap somewhat, but you can cut any sheets that are too large to avoid excessive doubling up.





Top pasta with another thin layer of ragù (thin enough that you can see the pasta through it in some spots). Drizzle a small amount of béchamel all over ragù, then top with a showering of grated Parmigiano-Reggiano. Repeat this layering process with pasta, ragù, béchamel, and grated cheese until baking dish is full; this should be about 6 layers. Finish with a top layer of pasta, then coat that with an even layer of the remaining béchamel sauce. Grate a final generous amount of cheese on top.











Serious Eats / Vicky Wasik






Bake lasagna until bubbling and browned on top, about 35 minutes (placing a rimmed baking sheet under the baking dish is good insurance in case anything bubbles over). Let rest 10 minutes, then serve.




   Special Equipment  

9- by 13-inch baking dish, pasta maker (optional)


   Notes  

You probably won't need a full two pounds of fresh pasta (nor a full two boxes dried), but I prefer to err on the side of having extra than risk falling short mid-assembly.


   Read More  

All-Day Meat Lasagna
Lasagna Napoletana (Lasagna With Sausage, Smoked Cheese, and Meatballs) Recipe
Vegan Lasagna alla Bolognese Recipe
Barbara Lynch's Tagliatelle Bolognese Recipe






Lasagna





Italian





Baked Pasta





Beef





Pork















Nutrition Facts (per serving)




689
Calories


37g 
Fat


55g 
Carbs


34g 
Protein








Show Full Nutrition Label


×



Nutrition Facts


Servings: 8




Amount per serving


Calories
689


% Daily Value*


Total Fat 37g
47%


Saturated Fat 15g
74%


Cholesterol 106mg
35%


Sodium 738mg
32%


Total Carbohydrate 55g
20%


Dietary Fiber 4g
16%


Total Sugars 10g


Protein 34g




Vitamin C 17mg
85%


Calcium 336mg
26%


Iron 4mg
24%


Potassium 825mg
18%


*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.





(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)


































































More Serious Eats Recipes

















All-Day Meat Lasagna





















12 Lasagna Recipes, From Meaty Bolognese to Vegan Variations





















The Best Slow-Cooked Bolognese Sauce Recipe





















Pasta alla Genovese (Pasta With Neapolitan Beef and Onion Ragù)





















Pasta With Butternut Squash and Sage Brown Butter





















Summer Vegetable Lasagna With Zucchini, Squash, Eggplant, and Tomato





















46 Saucy Italian Pasta Dishes You Should Know and Love





















19 Easy Italian Recipes for Any Night of the Week


























Vegan Lasagna alla Bolognese Recipe





















The Best Spinach Lasagna Recipe





















Introducing Lasagna Napoletana, the Meatball and Cheese-Packed Lasagna of Your Dreams | The Food Lab





















24 Father's Day Recipes Our Staff Wants to Make for Their Dads





















Classic Baked Macaroni and Cheese Casserole





















Homemade Fresh Pasta





















Vegan Italian-American Lasagna With DIY Ricotta and Mozzarella Substitutes





















The Food Lab's No-Boil Baked Ziti Recipe






























Get fresh recipes, cooking tips, deal alerts, and more!





Email Address













There was an error. Please try again.





 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 






 
Recipes

 

 
How-Tos

 

 
World Cuisines

 

 
Ingredients

 

 
Equipment

 

 
Features

 


About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
Contact







Your Privacy Choices
















Serious Eats is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.


Please review our updated Terms of Service.
























By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies



